
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. 

National Inst, of Mental Health (DHEW) , Chevy Chase, 
Md. National Clearinghouse for Mental Health 
Information. 

Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, 
Washington, D.C. 



71 

237p. 



EDRS PRICE MF— $0.65 HC-$9.87 

DESCRIPTORS * Abstracts; * Mental Health; Mental Health Programs; 

♦Psychiatry 

IDENTIFIERS *Freud (Sigmund) 



ABSTRACT 

In order to make mental health- related knowledge 
available widely and in a form to encourage its use, the National 
Institute of Mental Health collaborated with the American 
Psychoanalytic Association in this pioneer effort to abstract the 23 
volumes of the "Standard Edition of Freud." The volume is a 
comprehensive compilation of abstracts, keyed to all the 
psychoanalytic concepts found in the James Strachey edition of Freud. 
The subject index is designed as a guide for both the professional 
and the lay person. (TL) 



o 

EKJC 




U,s. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, 
EDUCATION & WELFARE 
OFFICE OF EOUCATION 
THIS DOCUMENT HAS BEEN REPRO- 
DUCED EXACTLY AS RECEIVED FROM 
THE PERSON OR ORGANIZATION ORIG- 
INATING IT POINTS OF VIEW OR OPIN- I 
IONS STATED DO NOT NECESSARILY 
REPRESENT OFFICIAL OFFICE OF EDU- 
CATION POSITION OR POLICY 



Abstracts prepared under Contract No. HSM-42-69-99 with Scientific 
Literature Corporation, Philadelphia, Pa. 19103 



EU UDd D4P 



CG 007 130 



ABSTRACTS of The Standard Edition of 
the Complete Psychological Works of 
Sigmund Freud 



Edited by 

• CARRIE LEE ROTHGEB, Chief 
Technical Information Section 
National Clearinghouse for Mental Health Information 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH EDUCATION AND WELFARE 

Health Services and Mental Health Administration 

National Institute of Mental Health 

5600 Fishers Lane 

Rockville, Maryland 20852 



N. 

O 

o 



CD 

CJ> 



o 

ERIC 



3 



DHEW Publication No. (HSM) 72-9001 
Printed 1971 Reprinted 1972 



For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C. 20402 • Price $1.75 
Stock Number 1724-0139 



4 



FOREWORD 



The mental health needs of our Nation are being met in a variety of ways— one of 
them the important area of dissemination and integration of existing knowledge. 

We at the National Institute of Mental Health are convinced that those responsible 
for research and training in mental health, regardless of their theoretical persuasions, 
stand to benefit from the infusion of new knowledge-to stimulate their critical 
processes and to contribute to the growing body of scientific knowledge through their 
fresh appraisals. 

Such benefits and contributions are enhanced and facilitated when interpreted and 
acted upon in the light of existing knowledge. An important aim of the Institute, through 
its National Clearinghouse for Mental Health Information, is to make that knowledge 
available widely and in a form to encourage its use. 

In this spirit, the Clearinghouse collaborated with the American Psychoanalytic 
Association in a pioneer effort to abstract the Standard Edition of Freud. 

While we recognize that Freud’s theoretical concepts are representative of but one 
school of thought in psychiatry, we are certain they are unique in the dialogues they have 
stimulated, in the research they have fostered, and in the contribution they have made to 
major therapeutic efforts. This, then, is one step toward vur ultimate aim of providing 
access to knowledge that will promote far ranging investigation of a host of philosophies 
and approaches. 

Abstracts of the Standard Edition of Freud is a comprehensive compilation of 
abstracts, keyed to all the psychoanalytic concepts found in the Standard Edition of 
Freud edited by James Stachey. The index is designed as a guide for both the professional 
and the lay person. We feel the abstracts will spur further inquiry to lead to more 
efficient investigation. This volume is symbolic of the NIMH effort, through the National 
Clearinghouse for Mental Health Information to aid the communication process. 

In this, the twenty-fifth anniversary year of the National Mental Health Act, it is 
fitting not only that we look to future advances in the mental health sciences but also 
that we gain a greater perspective of past contributions. This work serves as a model of 
what can be done and what will be done with ihcre? c .ing frequency by the Institute and, 
just as importantly, by others. 



BERTRAM S. BROWN, M.D. 

Director 



PREFACE 



The publication during the past 18 years of the definitive English language edition 
of the psychological writings of Sigmund Freud has been a milestone achievement for 
psychoanalysis, for the behavioral sciences, and for the advancement of scientific thought 
and intellectual progress in general. 

These 23 volumes of the Standard Edition (it is expected that a final 24th Index 
volume will be published shortly) with their careful and fluent translation and the 
thoughtful and extensive synthesizing editorial notes by the late James Strachey and his 
co-workers have become a unique educational and research source for the graduate 
psychoanalyst, for the advanced psychological practitioner and research worker, as well as 
for students and workers in the broad area of the behavioral sciences. 

The present volume consisting of abstracts of each paper and editor’s notes 
comprising the complete Standard Edition is an outgrowth of the combined persistent 
interests and efforts of the Committee on Indexing of the American Psychoanalytic 
Association and the Nations! Clearinghouse for Mental Health Information (NIMH). 

The work of the Committee on Indexing in the preparation and quality control of 
these abstracts has been strongly supported and encouraged consistently by the presiding 
officers, the Executive Council, and the entire membership of the American 
Psychoanalytic Association. 

It must be understood and appreciated that any attempt to abstract the uniquely 
literate, closely reasoned writings of Sigmund Freud with their clear, relevant (at times, 
vivid) clinical examples is an extremely difficult and challenging task. The revised 
translations of Freud’s works in the Standard Edition posed major problems (see 
Standard Edition vol. I, General Preface, pp. xviii - xx) in terms of accuracy and meaning; 
the difficulties in abstracting from these translations are equally monumental. The fact 
that the abstracting has been attempted at all is an achievement, and a tribute to those 
who accepted the challenge, especially the National Clearinghouse for Mental Health 
Information and the professional abstracting service with which it worked. 

To the experienced and serious student of Freud’s writings and concepts, there will 
certainly be seen gaps and areas of incompleteness in some of the abstracts, partly due to 
the intrinsic difficulties mentioned above, and partly to the requirements and rigors of an 
important and complex computerization project seeking to index and abstract the current 
behavioral science literature (with the limitation of each abstract to a maximum of 350 
words). 

During the course of the abstracting project, various additions and revisions were 
suggested by the Committee on Indexing (aided by several advanced psychoanalytic 
candidates from the Division of Psychoanalytic Education, Downstate Medical Center, 
State University of New York, and of the New York Psychoanalytic Institute). As many 
as possible of these corrections have been incorporated into the final text. 

Despite these limitations, the abstracts in their present form should be of 
inestimable value to those individuals who are interested in an initial understanding of the 
major concepts of psychoanalysis seen in a historical context as developed by Sigmund 
Freud. While they will be of considerable assistance in terms of general reference and 
survey to the graduate psychoanalyst, they will offer tremendous advantages and scope to 
all workers in the behavioral sciences. Here we may certainly include psychiatrists, 
psychiatric residents, psychologists and psychiatric social workers, as well as college, 
graduate, and medical students who are developing or continuing a further and deeper 
interest and understanding of classical psychoanalysis. Among other incidental yet 



O 



v 



6 



important uses of these abstracts will be their contribution to the development and 
publication of an additional index to the Standard Edition. 

The publication of these abstracts on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the 
National Mental Health Act seems an unusually felicitous and appropriate way of 
honoring Sigmund Freud, psychoanalysis, and the spirit of the legislative act that ushered 
in a national recognition of the significance of the solution of mental health problems 
affecting the people of the United States. 



BERNARD D. FINE, M.D., F.A.P.A. 
Chairman , Committee on Indexing 
American Psychoanalytic Association 



7 



vi 



o 




EDITOR'S PREFACE 



Work was begun on the abstracting of the Standard Edition of the Complete 
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud (James Strachey, ed., Hogarth Press, London) in 
order to make these abstracts available through the computer search system of the 
National Clearinghouse for Mental Health Information. It soon became evident that their 
utility could be greatly enhanced by providing a printed volume of all abstracts and a 
subject index. This publication was, therefore, prepared to fill a pressing need regarding 
secondary reference to Freud’s work. 

The accession number assigned to each abstract relates the Tyson and Strachey 
“Chronological Hand-list of Freud’s Works” (International Journal of Psycho-analysis , 
1956) to the volume and page number of the Standard Edition. Thus, in the number 
1886F 1/21 1886F refers to the Tyson and Strachey number and 1/21 refers to Vol. 1 
page 21 of the Standard Edition. A few of the page numbers have been adjusted (moved 
forward or backward) by one or two pages due to editor’s notes or introductions. This 
numbering system is also used in the KWOC (Key-Word-Out-of-Context) subject index. 
Sequence of the abstracts in this publication follows the Standard Edition. 

The National Clearinghouse for Mental Health Information is grateful to Dr. 
Bernard D. Fine, Chairman, Committee on Indexing, American Psychoanalytic 
Association for preparing the list of units for abstracting and for assisting with the review 
of the abstracts; and to Dr. George H. Klumpner, Cooruinator, Chicago Psychoanalytic 
Indexing Research Group for preparing the cross-references from the Tyson-Strachey 
numbers to the Standard Edition and assisting in the preparation of the KWOC Index. 



CARRIE LEE ROTHGEB, Chief 
Technical ^formation Section 
National Clearinghouse for 
Mental Health Information 



o 



• • 
Vll 



8 



CONTENTS 



Foreword 111 

Preface v 

Editor’s Preface ^ 

ABSTRACTS 

VOL. I Pre-Psycho-Analytic Publications and Unpublished Drafts (1886-1899) 1 

VOL. II Studies on Hysteria (1893-1895) 17 

VOL. Ill Early Psycho-Analytic Publications (1893-1899) 22 

VOL. IV The Interpretation of Dreams (I) (1900) 28 

VOL. V The Interpretation of Dreams (H N ind On Dreams (1900-1901) 34 

VOL. VI The Psychopathology of Ev< vday Life (1901) 40 

VOL. VII A Case of Hysteria, Three Essays on Sexuality and Other Works (1901-1905) • 44 

VOL. VIII Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious (1905) 53 

VOL. IX Jensen’s ‘Gradiva’ and Other Works (1906-1908) 58 

VOL. X The Cases of ‘Little Hans’ and the ‘Rat Man’ (1909) 63 

VOL. XI Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, Leonardo and Other Works (1910) 68 

VOL. XII Case History of Schreber, Papers on Technique and Other Works 

(1911-1913) 75 

VOL. XIII Totem and Taboo and Other Works (1913-1914) 83 

VOL. XIV A History of the Psycho-Analytic Movement, Papers on Metapsychology and 

Other Works (19 14-19 16) 89 

VOL. XV Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (Parts I and II) (19 1 5-1916) 99 

VOL. XVI Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (Part III) (1916-1917) 103 

VOL. XVII An Infantile Neurosis and Other Works (1917-1919) 107 

VOL. XVIII Beyond ;he Pleasure Principle, Group Psychology and Other Works 

(1920-1922) 116 

VOL. XIX The Ego and the Id and Other Works (1923-1925) 126 

VOL. XX An Autobiographical Study, Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, Lay 

Analysis and Other Works (1925-1926) 137 

VOL. XXI The Future of an Illusion, Civilization and its Discontents and Other Works 

(1^27-1931) 148 

VOL. XXII New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis and Other Works (1933-19 36)- 157 

VOL. XXIII Moses and Monotheism, An Outline of Psycho-Analysis and Other Works 

(1937-1939) 162 

Appendix 177 

Subject Index ^-1 



ix 



ABSTRACTS 



VOL. I Pre-Psycho-Analytic Publications 
and Unpublished Drafts (1886-1899) 

1/xxi 

General preface (2966). 

The aim of this work is to include the whole of 
Freud’s published psychological writings in The Com- 
plete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud (the 
Standard Edition). The Standard Edition does not 
include Freud’s correspondence. Nor, again, does the 
Standard Edition contain any reports or abstracts, 
published in contemporary periodicals, of the many 
lectures and papers given by Freud in his early days at 
meetings of various medical societies in Vienna. The 
whole contents of the Gesammelte Werke appear in the 
Standard Edition. In general, each volume contains all 
the works belonging to a specified span of years. The 
translations are based on the last German editions 
published in Freud’s lifetime. This edition was framed 
with the serious student in mind. The commentaries in 
the Standard Edition are of various kinds. First, there 
are the purely textual notes. Next come elucidations of 
Freud’s very numerous historical and local allusions and 
literary quotations. Another class of annotations is 
constituted by the cross references. Lastly, and more 
rarely, there are notes explanatory of Freud’s remarks. 
Each separate work is provided with an introductory 
note. The rule of uniform translation is used and is 
extended to phrases and to whole passages. Some 
technical terms, whose translation call for comment, are 
presented. 

1956 1/3 

Report on Freud’s studies in Paris and Berlin (1886). 

A report by Freud on some activities in Paris and 
Berlin is presented. The Salpetriere, in Paris, was 
converted into a home for aged women and provided a 
refuge for 5000 persons. Chronic nervous diseases 
appeared with particular frequency. A clinical section 
was opened in which both male and female patients were 
admitted for treatment. In his study of hysteria, 
Charcot, holder of a Chair of Neuropathology at the 
Salpetriere, started out from the most fully developed 
cases. He began by reducing the connection of the 
neurosis with the genital system to its correct propor- 
tions by demonstrating the unsuspected frequency of 
cases of male hysteria and especially of traumatic 
hysteria. In these typical cases, he next found a number 
of somatic signs which enabled him to establish the 
diagnosis of hysteria with certainty on the basis of 
positive indications. By making a scientific study of 



hypnotism, a region of neuropathology which had to be 
wrung on the one side of scepticism and on the other 
from fraud, he himself arrived at a kind of theory of 
hysterical symptomatology. By his efforts, hysteria was 
lifted out of the chaos of the neuroses and was 
differentiated from other conditions with a similar 
appearance. In Berlin, there was ample opportunity for 
examining children suffering from nervous diseases in 
the outpatient clinics. 

1886F 1/19 

Preface to the translation of Charcot’s lectures on the 
diseases of the nervous system (1886). 

By the winter of 1885, Professor Charcot was no 
longer studying nervous diseases that were based on 
organic changes and was devoting himself exclusively to 
research into the neuroses, and particularly hysteria. 
Charcot gave his permission to have a German transla- 
tion made of his lectures by Freud. The core of his book 

of translated lectures lies in the masterly and funda- 
mental lectures on hysteria, which, along with their 
author, were expected to open a new epoch in the 
estimation of this little known and, instead, much 
maligned neurosis. 

1886D 1/23 

Observation of a severe case of hemianaesthesia in a 
hysterical male (1886). 

The observation by Freud of a severe case of 
hemianaesthesia in a hysterical male is presented. The 
patient is a 29-year-old engraver; an intelligent man, who 
readily offered himself for examination in the hope of 
an early recovery. The patient developed normally in his 
childhood. At the age of 8, he was run over in the street. 
This resulted in a slight hearing loss. His present illness 
dated back for some 3 years. At that time he fell into a 
dispute with his dissolute brother, who refused to pay 
him back a sum of money. His brother threatened to 
stab him and ran at him with a knife. This threw the 
patient into indescribable fear. He ran home and 
remained unconscious for about 2 hours. The feeling in 
the left half of his body seemed altered, and his eyes got 
easily tired at his work. With a few oscillations, his 
condition remained like this for 3 years, until 7 weeks 
ago, a fresh agitation brought on a change for the worse. 
The patient was accused by a woman of a theft, had 
violent palpitations, was so depressed for about a 
fortnight that he thought of suicide, and at the same 
time a fairly severe tremor set in his left extremities. The 
only sense that was not diminished on the left side was 
hearing. The anaesthesia was also present in the left arm, 



0 

ERIC 




l 



I 



1887B 1/35 

trunk, and leg. His reflexes were brisker than normal, 
and showed little consistency with one another. In 
accordance with a hysterical hemianaesthesia, the pa- 
tient exhibited both spontaneously and on pressure, 
painful areas on what was otherwise the insensitive side 
of his body, what are known as hysterogenic zones, 
though in this case their connection with the provoking 
of attacks was not marked. The right side of the body 
was not free from anaesthesia, though this was not of a 
high degree and seemed to affect only the skin. 

1887B 1/35 

Two short reviews. Averbeck’s Acute Neurasthenia and 
Weir Mitchell’s Neurasthenia and Hysteria (1887). 

A review by Freud of Averbeck’s Die Akute Neur- 
asthenia is presented. Neurasthenia may be described as 
the commonest of all the diseases in the society: it 
complicates and aggravates most other clinical pictures 
in patients of the better classes and it is either still quite 
unknown to the many scientifically educated physicians 
or is regarded by them as no more than a modern name 
with an arbitrarily compounded content. Neurasthenia is 
not a clinical picture in the sense of textbooks based too 
exclusively on pathological anatomy: it should rather be 
described as a mode of reaction of the nervous system. A 
review of Weir Mitchell’s Die Behandlung Gewisser 
Formen von Neurasthenie und Hysterie is presented. The 
therapeutic procedure proposed by Weir Mitchell was 
first recommended in Germany by Bur kart and has been 
given full recognition during the last year in a lecture by 
Leyden. This procedure, by a combination of rest in 
bed, isolation, feeding up, massage and electricity in a 
strictly regulated manner, overcomes severe and long 
established states of nervous exhaustion. 

1888B 1/39 
Hysteria (1888). 

The name hysteria originates from the earliest times 
of medicine and is a precipitate of the prejudice which 
links neuroses with diseases of the female 'sexual 
apparatus. Hysteria is a neurosis in the strictest sense of 
the word. Hysteria is fundamentally different from 
neurasthenia and is contrary to it. The symptomatology 
of major hysteria is composed of a series of symptoms 
which include the following: convulsive attacks, hystero- 
genic zones, disturbances of sensibility, disturbances of 
sensory activity, paralyses, and contractures. The 
symptomatology of hysteria has a number of general 
characteristics. Hysterical manifestations have the char- 
acteristic of being excessive. At the same time, any 
particular symptom can occur in isolation: anesthesia 
and paralysis arc not accompanied by the general 
phenomena which, in the case of organic lesions, give 
evidence of a cerebral affection and which as a rule by 
their importance put the localizing symptoms in the 
shade. It is especially characteristic of hysteria for a 



disorder to be at the same time most highly developed 
and most sharply limited. Furthermore, hysterical 
symptoms shift in a manner which from the outset 
excludes any suspicion of a material lesion-. In addition 
to the physical symptoms of hysteria, a number of 
psychical disturbances are observed. These are changes in 
the passage and in the association of ideas, inhibitions of 
the activity of the will, magnification and suppression of 
feelings, etc. Hysteria represents a constitutional anom- 
aly rather than a circumscribed illness. First signs of it 
are probably exhibited in early youth. Hysteria may be 
combined with many other neurotic and organic nervous 
diseases, and such cases offer great difficulties to 
anal ysis. From the standpoint of treatment, 3 tasks must 
be separated: the treatment of the hysteri cal disposition, 
of hysterical outbreaks, and of individual hysterical 
symptoms. 

1/61 

Papers on hypnotism and suggestion (Editor’s Intro- 
duction) (1966). 

After Freud’s return to Vienna from Paris in 1886, he 
devoted much of his attention for some years to a study 
of hypnotism and suggestion. Freud had extensive 
clinical experience with hypnotism. While he was still a 
student he attended a public exhibition given by Hansen 
the magnetist and was convinced of the genuineness of 
the phenomena of hypnosis. After settling in Vienna as a 
nerve specialist, he made attempts at using various 
procedures, such as electrotherapy, hydrotherapy, and 
rest cures, for treating the neuroses, but fell back in the 
end on hypnotism. He soon stopped using hypnotism; 
however, his interest in the theory of hypnotism and 
suggestion lasted longer than his use of hypnotism. In 
spite of his early abandonment of hypnosis as a 
therapeutic procedure, Freud never hesitated throughout 
his life to express his sense of gratitude to it. 

1888X 1/73 

Preface to the translation of Bemheim’s suggestion 
(1888). 

The work of Dr. Bemheim of Nancy provides an 
admirable introduction to the study of hypnotism. The 
achievement of Bemheim consists in stripping the 
manifestations of hypnotism of their strangeness by 
linking them up with familiar phenomena of normal 
psychological life and of sleep. The subject of hypnotism 
has had a most unfavorable reception among the leaders 
of German medical science. The prevalent view doubted 
the reality of hypnotic phenomena and sought to 
explain the accounts given of them as due to a 
combination of credulity on the part of the observers 
and of simulation on the part of the subjects of the 
experiments. Another line of argument hostile to hyp- 
nosis rejects it as being dangerous to the mental health 
of the subject and labels it as an experimentally 



2 

'll 



o 



produced psychosis. Bernheim’s book, Hypnotism and 
Suggestion discusses another question, which divides the 
supporters of hypnotism into 2 opposing camps . One 
party, whose opinions are voiced by Dr. Bernheim, 
maintains that all the phenomena of hypnotism have the 
same origin; they arise, that is, from a suggestion, a 
conscious i lea, which has been introduced into the brain 
of the hypnotized person by an external influence and 
has been accepted by him as though it has arisen 
spontaneously. On this view all hypnotic manifestations 
would be psychical phenomena, effects of suggestions. 
The other party, on the contrary, stand by the view that 
the mechanism of some at least of the manifestations of 
hypnotism is based upon physiological changes occurring 
without the participation of those parts of it which 
operate with consciousness; they speak, therefore, of the 
physical or physiological phenomena of hypnosis. 
Hypnosis, whether it is produced in the one way or in 
the other, is always the same and shows the same 
appearances. 

1889 A 1/89 

Review of August Forel’s hypnotism (1889). 

ForeFs Hypnotism, Its Significance, and Its 
Management is concise, expressed with great clarity and 
decisiveness, and covers the whole field of phenomena 
and problems which are comprised under the heading of 
the theory of hypnotism. In the opening sections of his 
book Forel endeavors so far as possible to distinguish 
among facts, theories, concepts, and terminology. The 
main fact of hypnotism lies in the possibility of putting 
a person into a particular condition of mind which 
resembles sleep. This condition is known as hypnosis. A 
second set of facts lies in the manner in which this 
condition is brought about (and ended). A third set of 
facts concerns the performances of the hypnotized 
person. Further unquestionable facts are the dependence 
of the hypnotized subject’s mental activity on that of 
the hypnotist and the production of what are known as 
posthypnotic effects in the former. Three fundamentally 
different theories have been set up to explain the 
phenomena of hypnosis. The oldest of these supposes 
that, in the act of hypnotizing, an imponderable material 
passes over from the hypnotist into the hypnotized 
organism (magnetism). A second, somatic, theory ex- 
plains hypnotic phenomena on the pattern of spinal 
reflexes; it regards hypnosis as a physiologically altered 
condition of the nervous system brought about by 
external stimuli. Forel takes his stand on a third theory. 
According to this, all the phenomena of hypnosis are 
psychical effects, effects of ideas which are provoked in 
the hypnotized subject either intentionally or not . The 
second section of the book deals with suggestion and 
covers the whole field of the psychical phenomena that 
have been observed in subjects under hypnosis. A section 



1892B 1/115 

on the forensic significance of suggestion concludes the 
volume. 

1891D 1/103 
Hypnosis (1891). 

The technique of hypnotizing is just as difficult a 
medical procedure as any other. Hypnotic treatment 
should not be applied to symptoms which have an 
organic basis and should be reserved only for purely 
functional, nervous disorders, for ailments of psychical 
origin, and for toxic as well as other addictions. It is 
valuable for the patient who is to be hypnotized to see 
other people under hypnosis, to learn by imitation how 
he is to behave, and to learn from others the nature of 
the sensations during the hypnotic state. What is of 
decisive importance is only whether the patient has 
become somnambulistic or not; that is, whether the state 
of consciousness brought about in the hypnosis is cut off 
from the ordinary one sufficiently sharply for the 
memory of what occurred during hypnosis to be absent 
after waking. The true therapeutic value of hypnosis lies 
in the suggestions made during it. Through suggestion, 
either an immediate effect is called for, particularly in 
treating paralyses, contractures, and so on, or a post- 
hypnotic effect is called for; that is, one which is 
stipulated for a particular time after awakening. The 
duration of a hypnosis is arranged according to practical 
requirements; a comparatively long continuance under 
hypnosis, up to several hours, is certainly not unfavor- 
able to success. The depth of hypnosis is not invariably 
in direct proportion to its success. The field of hypnotic 
treatment is far more extensive than that of other 
methods of treating nervous illnesses. If hypnosis has 
had success, the stability of the cure depends on the 
same factors as the stability of every cure achieved in 
another way. 

1892B 1/115 

A case of successful treatment by hypnotism (1892—3). 

A case of successful treatment by hypnotism is 
presented. The subject was a young woman between 20 
and 30 years old. She had had difficulty in feeding her 
first child and the baby was finally given out to a wet 
nurse. Three years later, her second child was born, and 
she again had difficulty in feeding the child. She had no 
milk, retained no food, and was quite distressed with her 
inability to feed the baby. After two hypnotic sessions, 
die was able to feed the baby and nursed it until the 
baby was 8 months old. The next year, a third child 
made the same demands on the mother and she was as 
unabre to meet them as on the previous occasions. Once 
again, after the second hypnosis the symptoms were so 
completely cut short that a third was not required. This 
child too, was fed without any trouble and the mother 
has enjoyed uninterrupted good health. There are certain 



1892 A 1/131 



ideas which have an affect of expectancy attached to 
them. They are of two kinds: intentions and expecta- 
tions. The affect attached to these ideas is dependent on 
two factors: first on the degree of importance associated 
with the outcome, and secondly on the degree of 
uncertainty inherent in the expectation of that outcome. 
The subjective uncertainty (the counter expectation) is 
itself represented by a collection of ideas which are 
called distressing antithetic ideas. In neuroses, where 
primary presence of a tendency toward. depression and 
low self-confidence exists, great attention is paid by the 
patient to antithetic ideas against his intentions. When 
this intensification of antithetic ideas relates to expecta- 
tions, if the case is one of a simple nervous state, the 
effect is shown in a generally pessimistic frame of mind; 
if the case is one of neurasthenia, associations with the 
most accidental sensations occasion the numerous 
phobias of neurasthenics. 

1892A 1/131 

Preface and footnotes to the translation of Charcot’s 
Tuesday Lectures (1892-4). 

Charcot’s Tuesday Lectures contain so much that is 
novel that there is nobody, not even among experts, who 
will read them without a substantial increase of his 
knowledge. These lectures owe a peculiar charm to the 
fact that they are entirely, or for the most part, 
improvisations. The Professor does not know the patient 
who is brought before him, or knows him only superfi- 
cially. He questions the patient, examines one symptom 
or another, and in that way determines the diagnosis of 
the case and restricts it or confirms it by further 
examination. Interest in a lecture was often properly 
aroused only when the diagnosis had been made and the 
case had been dealt with in accordance with its 
peculiarities. After this, Charcot would take advantage 
of the freedom afforded by this method of instruction in 
order to make remarks on similar cases in his recollec- 
tion and for introducing the most important discussions 
on the genuinely clinical topics of their etiology, 
heredity and connection with other illnesses. Extracts 
from the footnotes to the translation of Charcot’s 
Tuesday Lectures are presented. 

1941 A 1/147 

Sketches for the ‘‘preliminary communication” of 1893. 
On the theory of hysterical attacks. 

In a letter from Freud to Josef Breuer, the following 
theories of hysteria are offered: the theorem concerning 
the constancy of the sum of excitation; the theory of 
memory; and the theorem which lays it down that the 
contents of different states of consciousness are not 
associated with one another. The recollections lying 
behind hysterical phenomena are absent from the 
patient’s accessible memory, whereas under hypnosis 



they can be awakened with hallucinatory vividness. 
Therapy consists in removing the results of the ideas that 
have not been abreacted, either by reviving the trauma in 
a state of somnambulism, and then abreacting and 
correcting it, or by bringing it into normal consciousness 
under comparatively light hypnosis. The opinions on 
hysterical attacks have been reached by treating hysteri- 
cal subjects by means of hypnotic suggestion and by 
questioning them under hypnosis and thus investigating 
their psychical processes during the attack. The constant 
and essential content of a (recurrent) hysterical attack is 
the return of a psychical state which the patient has 
already experienced earlier. The memory which forms 
the content of a hysterical attack is not any chance one; 
it is the return of the event which caused the outbreak 
of hysteria: the psychical trauma. The memory which 
forms the content of a hysterical attack is an uncon- 
scious one; that is, it is part of the second state of 
consciousness which is present in every hysteria. If a 
hysterical subject seeks intentionally to forget an experi- 
ence or forcibly repudiates, inhibits and suppresses an 
intention or an idea, these psychical acts enter the 
second state of consciousness; from there they produce 
their permanent effects and the memory of them returns 
as a hysterical attack. 

1893C 1/157 

Some points for a comparative study of organic and 
hysterical motor paralyses (1893). 

Clinical neurology recognizes two kinds of motor 
paralyses: peripherospinal (or bulbar) paralysis and 
cerebral paralysis. The type of the former is the facial 
paralysis in Bell’s Palsy, the paralysis in acute infantile 
poliomyelitis, etc. Cerebral paralysis, on the contrary, is 
always a disorder that attacks a large portion of the 
periphery, a limb, a segment of an extremity or a 
complicated motor apparatus. Hysteria has fairly often 
been credited with a faculty for simulating various 
organic nervous disorders. Only flaccid hysterical paraly- 
ses never affect single muscles (except where the muscle 
concerned is the sole instrument of a function). They are 
always paralyses en masse and in this respect they 
correspond to organic cerebral paralyses. Hysterical 
paralysis can be more dissociated, more systematized, 
than cerebral paralysis. Hysteria is a disease of excessive 
manifestations; it tends to produce its symptoms with 
the greatest possible intensity. This characteristic is 
shown not only in its paralyses but also in its contrac- 
tures and anesthesia. Hysterical paralysis is characterized 
by precise limitation and excessive intensity. It possesses 
both these qualities at once, whereas in organic cerebral 
paralysis, these two characteristics are not associated 
with each other. Hysterical paralyses are much more 
frequently accompanied by disorders of sensibility than 
are organic paralyses. The lesion in hysterical paralyses 
consists in nothing other than the inaccessibility of the 



13 4 



» 



organ or function concerned to the associations of the 
conscious ego. This purely functional alteration is caused 
by the fixation of this conception in a subconscious 
association with the memory of the trauma; and this 
conception does not become liberated and accessible so 
long as the quota of affect of the psychical trauma has 
not been eliminated by an adequate motor reaction or 
by conscious psychical activity. 

1950A 1/173 

Extracts from the Fliess papers (1892-1899). 

Wilhelm Fliess, a man 2 years younger than Freud, 
was a nose and throat specialist living in Berlin with 
whom Freud carried on a voluminous and intimate 
correspondence between 1887 and 1902. Fliess was a 
man of great ability, with very wide interests in general 
biology; but he pursued theories in that field which are 
regarded today as eccentric and quite untenable. Freud 
communicated his thoughts to him with the utmost 
freedom and did so not only in his letters but in a series 
of papers which presented organized accounts of his 
developing views. These papers were totally unknown 
until the time of the Second World War. The material in 
these drafts and letters was not intended by their author 
as the considered expression of his opinions, and it is 
often framed in a highly condensed form. 

1950A 1/177 

Draft A. Aetiology of actual neuroses (1892). 

Some of the problems in the study of hysteria are 
presented. They include: Is the anxiety of anxiety 
neuroses derived from the inhibition of the sexual 
function or from the anxiety linked with their etiology? 
To what extent does a healthy person respond to later 
sexual traumas differently from an unhealthy one? Is 
there an innate neurasthenia with innate sexual weakness 
or is it always acquired in youth? What plays a part in 
the etiology of periodic depression? Is sexual anesthesia 
in women anything other than a result of impotence? 
The theses include: 1) no neurasthenia or analogous 
neurosis exists without a disturbance of the sexual 
function; 2) this either has an immediate causal effect or 
acts as a disposition for other factors; 3) neurasthenia in 
men is accompanied by relative impotence; 4) neur- 
asthenia in women is a direct consequence of neur- 
asthenia in men; 5) periodic depression is a form of 
anxiety neurosis; 6) anxiety neurosis is in part a 
consequence of inhibition of the sexual function; 7) 
hysteria in neurasthenic neuroses indicates suppression 
of the accompanying affects. The following groups were 
proposed for observation: men and women who have 



1950A 1/184 

remained healthy, sterile women, women infected with 
gonorrhoea, loose living men who are gonorrhoeal, 
members of severely tainted families who have remained 
healthy, and observations from countries in which 
particular sexual abnormalities are endemic. The etio- 
logical factors include: exhaustion owing to abnormal 
satisfaction, inhibition of the sexual function, affects 
accompanying these practices, and sexual traumas before 
the age of understanding. 

1950A 1/179 

Draft B. The Aetiology of the neuroses (1893). 

The etiology of the neuroses is discussed. Neur- 
asthenia is a frequent consequence of an abnormal 
sexual life. Neurasthenia in males is acquired at puberty 
and becomes manifest in the patient’s twenties. Its 
source is masturbation, the frequency of which runs 
completely parallel with the frequency of male neur- 
asthenia. Girls are sound and not neurasthenic; and this 
is true as well of young married women, in spite of all 
the sexual traumas of this period of life. In compara- 
tively rare cases neurasthenia appears in married wome i 
and in older unmarried ones in its pure form; it is then 
to be regarded as having arisen spontaneously. The 
mixed neurosis of women is derived from neurasthenia 
in men in all those not infrequent cases in which the 
man, being a sexual neurasthenic, suffers from impaired 
potency. The admixture of hysteria results directly from 
the holding back of the excitation of the act. Every case 
of neurasthenia is marked by a certain lowering of self 
confidence, by pessimistic expectation and an inclina- 
tion to distressing antithetic ideas. Anxiety neurosis 
appears in two forms: as a chronic state and as an attack 
of anxiety. The chronic symptoms are: 1) anxiety 
relating to the body (hypochondria); 2) anxiety relating 
to the functioning of the body (agoraphobia, claustro- 
phobia, giddiness on heights); and 3) anxiety relating to 
decisions and memory. Periodic depression, an attack of 
anxiety lasting for weeks or months, is another form of 
anxiety neurosis. It is concluded that the neuroses are 
entirely preventable as well as entirely incurable. The 
physician’s task is wholly shifted on to prophylaxis. 

1950A 1/184 

Letter 14. Coitus interruptus as an aetiological factor 
(1893). 

Four new cases are discussed whose etiology, as 
shown by the chronological data, was given as coitus 
interruptus. The first case is a 41-year-old woman. She 
was very intelligent and had no fear of having children. 



5 

14 

O 

ERIC 



1950A 1/186 

Her diagnosis was that of simple anxiety neurosis. The 
second case is a 24-year-old woman. She was described 
as a nice, stupid young woman in whom the anxiety was 
highly developed. After a short while she had hysteria 
for the first time. The third case is a 42-year-old man 
with anxiety neurosis and heart symptoms. He was a 
very potent man who was a great smoker. The fourth 
case is a 34-year-old man who was (without having 
masturbated) only moderately potent. 

1950A 1/186 

Draft D. On the aetiology and theory of the major 
neuroses (1894). 

The etiology and theory of the major neuroses are 
presented. Included in the morphology of the neuroses 
are the following categories: neurasthenia and the 
pseudoneurasthenias, anxiety neurosis, obsessional 
neurosis, hysteria, melancholia and mania, the mixed 
neuroses, and the ramifications of the neuroses and 
transitions to the normal. The etiology of the neuroses 
covers the following neuroses: neurasthenia, anxiety 
neurosis, obsessional neurosis and hysteria, melancholia, 
and the mixed neuroses. It also covers: the basic 
etiological formula, the sexual factors in their etiological 
significance, an examination of the patients, objections 
and proofs, and the behavior of asexual people. A 
discussion of the relationship between etiology and 
heredity was planned. The following points were to be 
included in a discussion of theory: the points of contact 
with the theory of constancy, the sexual process in the 
light of the theory of constancy, the mechanism of the 
neuroses, the parallel between the neuroses of sexuality 
and neuroses. 

1950A 1/188 

Letter 18. Effect of sexual noxae (1894). 

Three mechanisms of the neuroses are presented: 
transformation of affect (conversion hysteria), displace- 
ment of affect (obsessions), and exchange of affect 
(anxiety neurosis and melancholia). In every case what 
seems to undergo these alterations is sexual excitation, 
but the impetus to them is not, in every case, something 
sexual. In every case in which neuroses are acquired, 
they are acquired owing to disturbances of sexual life; 
but there are people in whom the behavior of their 
sexual affects is disturbed hereditarily, and they develop 
the corresponding forms of hereditary neuroses. The 
most geneial aspects from which the neuroses can be 
classified are the following: degeneracy, senility, con- 
flict, and conflagration. 



195 OA 1/189 

Draft E. How anxiety originates ( 1 894) 

The anxiety of the neurotic patient has a great deal to 
do with sexuality; and in particular, with coitus inter- 
rupts. Anxiety neurosis affects women who are anes- 
thetic in coitus just as much as sensitive ones. Several 
cases in which anxiety arose from a sexual cause are 
presented: anxiety in virginal people; anxiety in inten- 
tionally abstinent people; anxiety of necessarily abstin- 
ent people; anxiety of women living in coitus inter- 
rupts; anxiety of men practicing coitus interrupts; 
anxiety of men who go beyond their desire or strength; 
and anxiety of men who abstain on occasion. Anxiety 
neurosis is a neurosis of damming up, like hysteria. In 
anxiety neurosis there must be a deficit to be noted in 
sexual affect, in psychical libido. If this connection is 
put before women patients, they are always indignant 
and declare that on the contrary they now have no 
desire whatever. Men patients often confirm it as an 
observation that since suffering from anxiety they have 
felt no sexual desire. When there is an abundant 
development of physical sexual tension, but this cannot 
be turned into affect by psychical working over, the 
sexual tension is transformed into anxiety. A part is 
played in this by the accumulation of physical tension 
and the prevention of discharge in the psychical direc- 
tion. There is a kind of conversion in anxiety neurosis 
just as there is in hysteria; but in hysteria it is psychical 
excitation that takes a wrong path exclusively into the 
somatic field, whereas here it is a physical tension, which 
cannot enter the psychical field and therefore remains 
on the physical path. 

1950A 1/195 

Draft F. Collection III Two case histories (1894). 

Two cases are presented with a discussion of each 
one; In the first case, that of a 27 -year-old man, there 
was a hereditary disposition: his father suffered from 
melancholia and his sister had a typical anxiety neurosis. 
The subject’s libido had been diminishing for some time; 
the preparations for using a condom were enougn to 
make him feel that the whole act was something forced 
on him and his enjoyment of it something he was 
persuaded into. The fear of infection and the decision to 
use a condom laid the foundation for what has been 
described as the factor of alienation between the somatic 
and the psychical. The effect would be the same as in 
the case of coitus interruptus with men. The subject 
brought psychical sexual weakness on himself because he 
spoiled coitus for himself, and his physical health and 



6 



o 

ERIC 



15 



fk 



» 



production of sexual stimuli being unimpaired, the 
situation gave rise to the generation of anxiety. Hie 
second case involves a healthy 44-year-old man. Ho 
complained that he was losing his liveliness and zest, in a 
way that was not natural in a man of his age. This was 
described as a mild but very characteristic case of 
periodic depression, melancholia. The symptoms, 
apathy, inhibition, intracranial pressure, dyspepsia, and 
insomnia complete the picture. 

19S0A 1/199 

Letter 21 . Two case histories (1 894). 

Two cases are presented and discussed. The first, a 
34-year-old physician, suffered for manv vears from 
organic sensitivity of the eyes: phospheum (flashes), 
dazzle, scotomas, etc. This increased enormously, to the 
point of preventing him from working. This was diag- 
nosed as a typical case of hypochondria in a particular 
organ in a masturbater at periods of sexual excitation. 
The second case is that of a 28-year-old boy from a 
highly neurotic family. He suffered for some weeks from 
lassitude, intracranial pressure, shaky knees, reduced 
potency, premature ejaculation, and the beginnings of 
perversion. He alleged that his potency has been capri- 
cious from the first; admitted masturbation, but not too 
prolonged; and had a period of abstinence behind him 
now. Before that, he had anxiety states in the evening. 
There was some doubt as to his honesty. 

19S0A i/200 

Draft G. Melancholia (1895). 

There are striking connections between melancholia 
and anesthesia. Melancholia is generated as an intensifi- 
cation of neurasthenia through masturbation. Melan- 
cholia appears in typical combination with severe anx- 
iety. The type and extreme form of melancholia seems 
to be the periodic or cyclical hereditary form. The affect 
corresponding to melancholia is that of mourning. The 
nutritional neurosis parallel to melancholia is anorexia. 
Potent individuals easily acquire anxiety neuroses; im- 
potent ones incline to melancholia. A description of the 
effects of melancholia includes: psychical inhibition 
with instinctual impoverishment and pain concerning it. 
Anesthesia seems to encourage melancholia; however, 
anesthesia is not the cause of melancholia but a sign of 
disposition to it. 

1950A 1/206 

Draft H. Paranoia (1895). 

In psychiatry, delusional ideas stand alongside of 
obsessional ideas as purely intellectual disorders, and 



1950A 1/214 

paranoia stands alongside of obsessional insanity as an 
intellectual psychosis. Paranoia, in its classical form, is a 
pathological mode of defense, like hysteria, obsessional 
neurosis and hallucinatory confusion. People become 
paranoiac over things that they cannot put up with, 
provided that they possess the peculiar psychical disposi- 
tion for it. The purpose of paranoia is to fend off an idea 
that is incompatible with the ego, by projecting its 
substance into the external world. The transposition is 
effected very simply. It is a question of an abuse of a 
psychical mechanism which is very commonly employed 
in normal life: transposition or projection. Paranoia is 
the abuse of the mechanism of projection for purposes 
of defense. Something quite analogous takes place with 
obsessional ideas. The mechanism of substitution is a 
normal one. This normally operating mechanism of 
substitution is abused in obsessional ideas for purposes 
of defense. The delusional idea is maintained with the 
same energy with which another, intolerably distressing, 
idea is fended off from the ego. They love their 
delusions as they love themselves. Paranoia and hallu- 
cinatory confusion are the two psychoses of defense or 
contrariness. 

1950A 1/213 

Letter 22. Dream as analogy to D’s dream psychosis 
(1895). 

A small analogy to D’s dream psychosis is reported. 
Rudi Kaufmann, a very intelligent nephew of Breuer’s, 
and a medical student too, is a late riser. He gets himself 
called by a servant, but is very reluctant about obeying 
her. One morning she woke him up a second time and, as 
he would not respond, called him by his name: ‘Herr 
Rudi!’ Thereupon the sleeper had a hallucination of a 
notice board over a hospital bed with the name ‘Rudolf 
Kaufmann’ on it, and said to himself: ‘RJC.’s in the 
hospital in any case, then; so I needn’t go there!’ and 
went on sleeping. 

1950A 1/214 

Draft I. Migraine: Established points (1895). 

The established points concerning migraine are pre- 
sented. There is an interval of hours or days between the 
instigation and the outbreak of the symptoms. Even 
without an instigation there is an impression that there 
must be an accumulating stimulus which is present in the 
smallest quantity at the beginning of the interval and in 
the largest quantity towards its end. Migraine appears to 
be a matter of summation, in which susceptibility to 
etiological factors lies in the height of the level of the 
stimulus already present. Migraine has a complicated 



V 




455-582 0 - 72-2 



16 



1950A 1/215 

etiology, perhaps on the pattern of a chain etiology, 
where approximate cause can be produced by a number 
of factors directly and indirectly, or on the pattern of a 
summation etiology, where, alongside of a specific cause, 
stock causes can act as quantitative substitutes. Mi* 
graines appear rarest in healthy males; are restricted to 
the sexual time of life; and appear frequently in people 
with disturbed sexual discharge. Migraine can be pro- 
duced by chemical stimuli too, such as: human toxic 
emanations, scirocco, fatigue, and smells. There is a 
cessation of migraine during pregnancy. The pain of a 
neuralgia usually finds its discharge in tonic tension. 
Therefore, it is not impossible that migraine may include 
a spastic innervation of the muscles of blood vessels in 
the reflex sphere of the dural region. 

1950A 1/215 

Draft J. Frau P.J. (aged 27) (1895). 

The subject of this study is a 27*year*old woman. She 
had been married for 3 months. Her husband, a 
commercial traveller, had had to leave her a few weeks 
after their marriage. She missed him very much and 
longed for him. To pass the time, she was sitting at the 
piano singing, when suddenly she felt ill in her abdomen 
and stomach, her head swam, she had feelings of 
oppression and anxiety and cardiac paraesthesia; she 
thought she was going mad. Next day, the servant told 
her that a woman living in the same house had gone 
mad. From that time on she was never free of an 
obsession, accompanied by anxiety, that she was going 
to go mad too. It was assumed that her condition then 
had been an anxiety attack: a release of sexual feeling 
which was transformed into anxiety. With probing, it 
was discovered that she had had another attack 4 years 
earlier, also while she was singing. An effort was made to 
determine the other ideas present in order to account for 
the release of sexual feeling and the fright. However, 
instead of revealing these intermediate links, she dis- 
cussed her motives. 

1/219 

Note. By Strachey (1966). 

During the whole of the latter part of the year 1895 
Freud was largely occupied with the fundamental 
theoretical problem of the relation between neurology 
and psychology. His reflections finally led to the 
uncompleted work which was named a Project for a 
Scientific Psychology . This was written in September 
and October, 1895, and should appear, chronologically, 
at this point in the Fliess papers. It stands so much 



apart, however, from the rest of them, and constitutes 
such a formidable and self contained entity, that it was 
printed in a detached shape at the end of the first 
volume of the Standard Edit ion. One letter, Number 39, 
written on January 1 , 1896, is so closely connected with 
the Project that it too has been removed from its proper 
place in the correspondence and printed as an appendix 
to the Project. That Freud had also during all this period 
been concerned with clinical matters as well, is conclu- 
sively shown by the fact that on the very same day on 
which he dispatched this letter, he also sent Fliess Draft 
K. 

1950 A 1/220 

Draft K. The neuroses of defence: A Christmas fairy 
tale (1896). 

The neuroses of defense are discussed. There are 4 
types of neuroses of defense. A comparison is made 
between 3 different emotional states: hysteria, obses- 
sional neurosis, and one form of paranoia. They have 
various things in common. They are all pathological 
aberrations of normal psychical affective states: of 
conflict (hysteria), of self-reproach (obsessional neu- 
rosis), of mortification (paranoia), of mourning (acute 
hallucinatory amentia). They differ from these affects in 
that they do not lead to anything being settled but to 
permanent damage to the ego. Heredity is a precondi- 
tion, in that it facilitates and increases the pathological 
affect. It is this precondition which mainly makes 
possible the gradations between the normal and extreme 
case. There is a normal trend toward defense; however, 
the trend toward defense becomes detrimental if it is 
directed against ideas which are also able, in the form of 
memories, to release fresh unpleasure, as is the case with 
sexual ideas. The course taken by the illness in neuroses 
of repression is almost always the same: 1) there is a 
sexual experience which is traumatic and premature and 
becomes repressed. 2) its repression on some later 
occasion arouses a memory of it; at the same time, there 
is the formation of a primary symptom. 3) there is a 
stage of successful defense, which is equivalent to health 
except for the existence of the primary symptom. 4) the 
last stage is that in which the repressed ideas return, and 
in which during the struggle between them and the ego, 
new symptoms are formed which are those of the illness 
proper; that is, a stage of adjustment, of being over- 
whelmed, or of recovery with a malformation. In 
obsessional neuroses, the primary experience has been 
accompanied by pleasure. In paranoia, the primary 
experience seems to be of a similar nature to that in 
obsessional neurosis; repression occurs after the memory 



8 



17 



1950A 



of it has released unpleasure. Hysteria presupposes a 
primary experience of unpleasure of a passive nature. 

1950A 1/229 

Letter 46. Four periods of life and aetiology (1896). 

The following solution to the etiology of the psycho- 
neuroses are presented. Four periods of life are distin- 
guished: up to 4 years, preconscious; up to 8 years, 
infantile; up to 14 years, prepubertal; and up to infinity, 
maturity. The periods between 8 to 10 and 13 to 17 are 
the transitional periods during which repression occurs. 
The scenes for hysteria occur in the first period of 
childhood (up to 4 years), in which the mnemic residues 
are not translated into verbal images. Hysteria always 
results, and in the form of conversion. The scenes for 
obsessional neuroses belong to the infantile period. The 
scenes for paranoia fall in the prepubertal period and are 
aroused in maturity. In that case, defense is manifested in 
disbelief. Hysteria is the only neurosis in which symptoms 
are possible even without defense. Consciousness, as re- 
gards memories, consists of the verbal consciousness per- 
taining to them; that is, in access to the associated word 
presentations. Consciousness is not attached exclusively 
and inseparably either to the so-called unconscious or to 
the so-called conscious realm, so that these names seem 
to call for rejection. Consciousness is determined by a 
compromise between the different psychical powers 
which come into conflict with one another when 
repressions occur. These powers include: the inherent 
quantitative strength of a presentation and a freely 
displaceable attention which is attracted according to 
certain rules and repelled in accordance with the rule of 
defense. It is in the conflict between uninhibited and 
thought-inhibited psychical processes that symptoms 
arise. One species of psychical disturbance arises if the 
power of the uninhibited processes increases; another if 
the force of the thought inhibition relaxes. 

1950A 1/233 

Letter 50. Funeral dream (1896). 

Freud presented a report of a dream: I was in some 
public place and read a notice there: You are asked to 
close the eyes. I recognized the place as the barber’s to 
which I go every day. On the day of the funeral I was 
kept waiting there and therefore reached the house of 
mourning rather late. At that time my family was 
displeased with me because I had arranged for the 
funeral to be quiet and simple, which they later agreed 
was quite right. They also took my being late in 
somewhat bad part. The sentence on the notice board 
has a double sense, and means in both of them: ‘one 
should do one’s duty to the dead’. (An apology, as 



1/240 

though 1 had not done it and my conduct needed 
overlooking, and the duty taken literally.) Thus the 
dream is an cutlet for the inclination to self-reproach 
which is regularly present among survivors. 

1950A 1/234 

Letter 52. Stratification of memory traces (1896). 

A thesis is presented that memory is present not once 
but several times over, that it is laid down in various 
species of indications. There are at least 3 registrations, 
probably more. The different registrations are also 
separated (not necessarily topographically) according to 
the neurones which are their vehicles. The perceptions 
are neurones in which perceptions originate, to which 
consciousness attaches, but which in themselves retain 
no trace of what has happened. Consciousness and 
memory are mutually exclusive. The indication of 
perception is the first registration of the perceptions; it 
is quite incapable of consciousness, and is arranged 
according to associations by simultaneity. Unconscious- 
ness is the second registration, arranged according to 
other (perhaps causal) relations. The unconsciousness 
traces correspond to conceptual memories; equally 
inaccessible to consciousness. Preconsciousness is the 
third transcription, attached to word presentations and 
corresponding to the official ego. The cathexes proceed- 
ing from preconsciousness become conscious according 
to certain rules; and this secondary thought conscious- 
ness is subsequent in time, and is probably linked to the 
hallucinatory activation of word presentations, so that 
the neurones of consciousness would once again be 
perceptual neurones and in themselves without memory. 
The successive registrations represent the psychical 
achievement of successive epochs of life. At the frontier 
between 2 such epochs a translation of the psychical 
material must take place. A failure of translation is 
known as repression. There are 3 groups of sexual 
psychoneuroses: hysteria, obsessional neurosis, and para- 
noia. Repressed memories relate to what was current in 
the case of hysteria between the ages of VA and 4, of 
obsessional neurosis between 4 and 8, and of paranoia 
between 8 and 14. 

1950A 1/240 

Letter 55. Determinants of psychosis (1897). 

Two ideas, based on analytic findings, are presented. 
The determinant of a psychosis (amentia or a confu- 
sional psychosis), instead of a neurosis seems to be 
sexual abuse that occurs before the end of the first 
intellectual stage (before 15 to 18 months). It is possible 
that the abuse may date back so far that these 



1950A 1/242 



experiences lie concealed behind the later ones. Epilepsy 
goes back to the same period. The perversions regularly 
lead into zoophilia, and have an animal character. They 
are explained not by the functioning of erotogenic zones 
which have later been abandoned, but by the operation 
of erotogenic sensations which lose this force later. The 
principal sense in animals is that of smell, which has lost 
that position in human beings. So long as smell (or taste) 
is dominant, hair, faces, and the whole surface of the 
body have a sexually exciting effect. The increase in the 
sense of smell in hysteria is no doubt connected with 
this. 

1950A 1/242 

Letter 56. Hysteria and witches (1 897). 

The medieval theory of possession, held by the 
ecclesiastical courts, is said to be identical with the 
theory of a foreign body and a splitting of conscious- 
ness. The cruelties made it possible to understand some 
symptoms of hysteria which have hitherto been obscure. 
The inquisitors pricked with needles, to discover the 
Devil’s stigmata, and in a similar situation the victims 
invented the same old cruel story (helped by the 
seducer’s disguises). Thus, not only the victims but the 
executioners recalled in this their earliest youth. 

1950A 1/243 

Letter 57. Witches and symbolism (1897). 

The idea of bringing in the witches is gaining strength. 
Details are beginning to crowd in. Their flying is 
explained; the broomstick they ride on is probably the 
great Lord Penis. Their secret gatherings, with dancing 
and other amusements, can be seen any day in the 
streets where children play. Alongside of flying and 
floating on the air can be put the gymnastic feats of 
boys in hysterical attacks. Perverse actions are always 
the same. They are made with a meaning and a pattern 
which one day will be understood. The dream is of a 
primeval Devil religion, whose rites are carried on 
secretly. There is a class of people, paranoiacs, who tell 
stories like those of the witches. These paranoiacs 
complain that people put feces in their food, illtreat 
them at night in the most abominable way, sexually, etc. 
There is a distinction between delusion of memory and 
interpretative delusions. The latter are connected with 
the characteristic indefiniteness concerning the evildoers, 
who are concealed by the defense. In hysterical patients, 
their fathers are seen behind their high standards in love, 
their humility towards their lover, or their being unable 
to marry because their ideals are unfulfilled. 



1950A 1/244 

Letter 59. Age of hysterical fantasies (1897). 

The point that escaped me in the solution of hysteria 
lies in the discovery of a new source from which a new 
element of unconscious production arises. What I have in 
mind are hysterical phantasies, which regularly, as it 
seems to me, go back to things heard by children at an 
early age and only understood later. The age at which 
they take in information of this kind is very remarkable, 
from the age of 6 to 7 months onwards! 

1950A 1/245 

Letter 60. Dream about Fliess (1 897). 

A dream is presented and discussed. The provoking 
cause of the dream was the events from the previous 
day. The dream was a telegraph message. It said Via, 
Casa Secerno, Villa. The interpretation of the dream was 
that it collected together all the annoyance that was 
unconsciously present in the dreamer. The complete 
interpretation occurred only after a lucky chance 
brought a fresh confirmation of paternal etiology. That 
case was an ordinary case of hysteria with the usual 
symptoms. 

1950A 1/247 

Letter 61. Structure of hysteria (1 897). 

The structure of hysteria is presented. Everything 
goes back to the reproduction of scenes, some of which 
can be arrived at directly, but others always by way of 
phantasies set up in front of them. The phantasies are 
derived from things that have been heard but understood 
subsequently and all their material is genuine. They are 
protective structures, sublimations of the facts, embel- 
lishments of them, and at the same time exonerations. 
Their precipitating origin is perhaps from masturbation 
phantasies. A second important piece of insight is that 
the psychical structures which, in hysteria, are affected 
by repression are not in reality memories, but impulses 
which arise from the primal scenes. All 3 neuroses 
(hysteria, obsessional neurosis, and paranoia) exhibit the 
same elements (along with the same etiology); that is, 
mnemic fragments, impulses (derived from the memory) 
and protective fictions. The breakthrough into con- 
sciousness and the formation of compromises (that is, of 
symptoms) occurs in them at different points. In 
hysteria, the memories; in obsessional neurosis, the 
perverse impulses; in paranoia, the protective fictions 
(phantasies), are what penetrate into normal life 
distorted by compromise. 




10 



19S0A 1/248 

Draft L. Architecture of hysteria (1897). 

The architecture of hysteria is presented . The aim of 
hysteria seems to be to arrive back at the primal scenes. 
In a few cases this is achieved directly, but in others only 
by a roundabout path. Phantasies are psychical facades 
constructed in order to bar the way to these memories. 
Phantasies at the same time serve the trend towards 
refining the things that are heard, and made use of 
subsequently; thus they combine things that have been 
experienced and things that have been perceived. An 
immense load of guilt, with self-reproaches, is made 
possible by identification with people of low morals, 
who are so often remembered as worthless women 
connected sexually with a father or a brother. There was 
a girl who was afraid to pick a flower or even to pull up 
a mushroom, because it was against the command of 
God, who did not wish living seeds to be destroyed. In 
hysteria, the following events and topics have been seen: 
the part played by servant girls, mushrooms, pains, 
multiplicity of psychical personalities, wrapping up, 
multiple editions of phantasies, and wishful dreams. 

1950A 1/250 

Draft M. Repression in hysteria (1897). 

The architecture of hysteria is presented. Some of the 
scenes are accessible directly, but others only by way of 
phantasies set up in front of them. The scenes are 
arranged in the order of increasing resistance: the more 
slightly repressed ones come to light first, but only 
incompletely on account of their association with the 
severely repressed ones. It is to be suspected that the 
essentially repressed element is always what is feminine. 
Phantasies arise from an unconscious combination, in 
accordance with certain trends, of things experienced 
and heard. These trends are toward making inaccessible 
the memory from which the symptoms have emerged or 
might emerge. Phantasies are constructed by a process of 
amalgamation and distortion analogous to the decom- 
position of a chemical body which is compounded with 
another one. All anxiety symptoms (phobias) are derived 
from phantasies. The kinds of compromise displacement 
are: displacement by association, hysteria; displacement 
by (conceptual) similarity, obsessional neurosis (charac- 
teristic of the place at which the defense occurs, and 
perhaps also of the time); and causal displacement, 
paranoia. Repression proceeds backwards from what is 
recent, and affects the latest events first. The phantasies 
in paranoia are systematic, all of them in harmony with 



1950A 1/254 

each other. The phantasies in hysteria are independent 
of one another and contradictory. 



1950A 1/253 

Letter 64. Two dreams (1897). 

Freud reported and discussed two dreams. The first 
dream was of having over-affectionate feelings towards 
Mathilde, only she was called Hella and afterwards the 
word Hella was printed in heavy type. The solution was 
that Hella is the name of an American niece. Mathilde 
could be called Hella because she has recently wept so 
much over the Greek defeats. She is enthusiastic about 
the mythology of ancient Hellas and naturally regards all 
Hellenes as heroes. The dream shows the fulfillment of 
the wish to catch a father as the originator of neurosis, 
and so to put an end to the doubts which still persist. 
The second dream concerned going up a staircase with 
very few clothes on. The dreamer was moving with great 
agility. Suddenly, a woman was coming and thereupon 
the experience set in of being glued to the spot. The 
accompanying feeling was not anxiety but an erotic 

excitation. 

* 

1950A 1/254 

Draft N. Impulses, fantasies and symptoms (1897). 

Hostile impulses against parents are an integral 
constituent of neuroses. They come to light consciously 
as obsessional ideas. In paranoia, delusions of persecu- 
tion correspond to these impulses. They are repressed at 
times when compassion for the parents is active. On such 
occasions, it is a manifestation of mourning to reproach 
oneself for their death or to punish oneself in a 
hysterical fashion with the same states that they have 
had. It seems as though this death wish is directed in 
sons against their fathers and in daughters against their 
mothers. Memories appear to bifurcate: part of them is 
put aside and replaced by phantasies; another, more 
accessible, part seems to lead directly to impulses. Belief 
(and doubt) is a phenomenon that belongs wholly to the 
system of the ego and has no counterpart in the 
unconscious. In the neuroses, belief is displaced; it is 
refused to the repressed material if it forces its way to 
reproduction and, as a punishment, transposed onto the 
defending material. The mechanism of poetry is the 
same as that of hysterical phantasies. Remembering is 
never a motive but only a way, a method. The first 
motive for the construction of symptoms is, chronologi- 
cally, libido. Thus symptoms, like dreams, are the 

“20 



o 



I950A 1/257 



fulfillment of a wish. The repression of impulses seems 
to produce not anxiety but perhaps depression, melan- 
cholia. In this way the melancholias arc related to 
obsessional neurosis. Holiness is something based on the 
fact that human beings, for the benefit of the larger 
community, have sacrificed a portion of their sexual 
liberty and their liberty to indulge in perversions. 

1950A 1/257 

Letter 66. Defense against memories (1897). 

Defense against the memories does not prevent their 
giving rise to higher psychical structures, which persist 
for a while and are then themselves subjected to defense. 
This, however, is of a most highly specific kind, precisely 
as in dreams, which contain, in a nutshell, the psychol- 
ogy of the neuroses quite generally. The most assured 
thing seems to be the explanation of dreams, but it is 
surrounded by a vast number of obstinate riddles. The 
organological questions await a solution. There is an 
interesting dream of wandering about among strangers, 
totally or half undressed and with feelings of shame and 
anxiety. The people do not notice it. This dream 
material, which goes back to exhibiting in childhood, has 
been misunderstood and worked over didactically in a 
well-known fairy tale. 

1950A 1/259 

Letter 67. Doubts about theory of neuroses (1897). 

A letter reflected various personal feelings of Freud. 
Things were fermenting but nothing had been finished. 
The psychology was satisfactory, but there were grave 
doubts about the theory of the neuroses. The mind was 
sluggish. After having been very cheerful, there was a 
period of ill temper. The mild hysteria, very much 
aggravated by work, however, had been resolved but the 
rest was still at a standstill. 

1950A 1/260 

Letter 69. Doubts about theory of neuroses (1897). 

The author’s original traumatic theory of the neu- 
roses is no longer held. There are 4 reasons given for its 
abandonment: 1) the continual disappointments in the 
attempts at bringing analysis to a real conclusion, the 
running away of people who had for a time seemed most 
in the grasp, the absence of the complete successes and 
the possibility of explaining the partial successes in other 
ways. 2) In every case the father had to be blamed as a 



pervert. 3) The discovery that there are no indications of 
reality in the unconscious, so that one cannot distinguish 
between the truth and fiction that is cathected with 
affect. 4) The reflection that in the most deep-going 
psychosis the unconscious memory does not break 
through, so that the secret of the childhood experience 
is not betrayed even in the most confused delirium. 
These doubts were the results of honest and forcible 
intellectual work. 



1950A 1/261 

Letter 70. Freud’s early memories from self-analysis 
(1897). 

Freud’s self-analysis, which he considered to be 
indispensable for throwing light upon a problem, pro- 
ceeded in dreams and presented several valuable infer- 
ences and clues. In summary, it seemed that the father 
played no active part in the case, but an inference was 
drawn by analogy on to him. The prime originator was a 
woman, ugly, elderly, but clever, who told a great deal 
about God Almighty and Hell and who instilled in him a 
high opinion of his capacities. Later, between 2 and 2 Vi 
years of age the libido was stirred up towards the 
mother. A dream is reported concerning his teacher in 
sexual matters who scolds him for being clumsy, washes 
him in reddish water and makes him give her silver coins. 
This is summed up as ‘bad treatment’, and alludes to his 
powerlessness as a therapist since he gets money from his 
bad treatment of patients. 

I950A 1/263 

Letter 71. Universality of Oedipus complex (1897). 

Self-analysis appeared to be the most essential task 
for Freud. An interpretation of a dream was confirmed 
by a discussion with his mother. It was concluded that 
to be completely honest with oneself is good practice. 
Falling in love with the mother and jealousy of the 
father was regarded as a universal event of early 
childhood. Because of this, the riveting power of 
Oedipus Rex can be understood. It was speculated that 
Hamlet had the same kinds of feelings to his father and 
mother. 

1950A 1/266 

Letter 72. Resistances reflect childhood (1897). 

Resistance, which finally brings work to a halt, is 
nothing other than the child’s past degenerate character, 



21 



12 



1950A 1/274 



which (as a result of those experiences which one finds 
present consciously in what are called degenerate cases) 
has developed or might have developed, but which is 
overlaid here by the emergence of repression. This 
infantile character develops during the period of long- 
ing, after the child has been withdrawn from the sexual 
experiences. Longing is the main character trait of 
hysteria, just as anesthesia is its main symptom. During 
this period of longing, the phantasies are constructed 
and masturbation is practiced, which afterwards yields 
to repression. If it does not give way, then there is no 
hysteria; the discharge of sexual excitation removes for 
the most part, the possibility of hysteria. 



1950A 1/267 

Letter 73. Children’s speech during sleep (1897). 

His analysis proceeds and remains Freud’s chief 
interest. Everything is still obscure, even the problems; 
but there is a comfortable feeling that one has only to 
rummage in one’s own storeroom to find, sooner or 
later, what one needs. The most disagreeable things are 
the moods, which often completely hide reality. For 
someone like him, too, sexual excitation is no longer of 
use. The speech of a 1 Vi -year-old child was reported and 
interpreted as wish fulfillment. Little Anna had to starve 
one day because she was sick in the morning, which was 
put down to a meal of strawberries. During the following 
night she called out a whole menu in her sleep: 
‘Stwawbewwies, wild stwawbewwies, omblet, pudden!’ 



1950A 1/268 

Letter 75. Erotogenic zones (1897). 

Something organic plays a part in repression. This 
notion was linked to the changed part played by the 
sensations of smell: the upright carriage that is adopted. 
The nose raised from the ground, at the same time a 
number of formerly interesting sensations attached to 
the earth becoming repulsive, by a unknown process. 
The zones, which no longer produce a release of sexuality 
in normal and mature human beings, must be the regions 
of the anus and of the mouth and throat. The 
appearance and idea of these zones no longer produce an 
exciting effect, and the internal sensations arising from 
them furnish no contribution to the libido, in the way in 
which the sexual organs do. In animals these sexual 
zones continue in force in both respects: if this persists 
in human beings too, perversion results. As we turn away 



our sense organs (the head and nose) in disgust, so do 
our preconsciousness and our conscious sense turn away 
from the memory. This is repression. Experiences in 
childhood which merely affect the genitals never pro- 
duce neurosis in males (or masculine females) but only 
compulsive masturbation and libido. The choice of 
neurosis (hysteria, obsessional neurosis, or paranoia) 
depends on the nature of the wave of development (that 
is to say, its chronological placing) which enables 
repression to occur. 

1950A 1/272 

Letter 79. Masturbation, addiction and obsessional 
neurosis (1897). 

Masturbation is the one major habit, the ‘primal 
addiction’ and it is only as a substitute and replacement 
for it that the other addictions for alcohol, morphine, 
tobacco, etc. come into existence. The part played by 
this addiction in hysteria is quite enormous; and it is 
perhaps there that the outstanding obstacle is to be 
found. As regards obsessional neurosis, the fact is 
confirmed thai the locality at which the repressed breaks 
through is the word presentation and not the concept 
attached to it. Hence the most disparate things are 
readily united as an obsessional idea under a single word 
with more than one meaning. Obsessional ideas are often 
clothed in a remarkable verbal vagueness in order to 
permit multiple employment. 

1950A 1/274 

Letter 84. Dreams and phylogenesis (1898). 

In a letter, Freud wrote that the dream book has 
come to a halt again and the problem has deepened and 
widened. The theory of wish fulfillment has brought 
about only the psychological solution and not the 
biological, or, rather, metaphysical one. Biologically, 
dream life seems to derive entirely from the residues of 
the prehistoric period of life, the same period which is 
the source of the unconscious and alone contains the 
etiology of all the psychoneuroses, the period normally 
characterized by an amnesia analogous to hysterical 
amnesia. The following formula was suggested : what is 
seen in the prehistoric period produces dreams; what is 
heard in it produces phantasies; and what is experienced 
sexually in it produces the psychoneuroses. The repeti- 
tion of v/hat was experienced in that period is in itself 
the fulfillment of a wish; a recent wish only leads to a 
dream if it can put itself in connection with material 
from this prehistoric period, if the recent wish is a 



13 

22 



o 



19S0A 1/275 

derivative of a prehistoric one or can get itself adopted 
by one. 

1950A 1/275 

Letter 97. Childhood enuresis (1898). 

The subject of a new case is a young man of 25, who 
can scarcely walk owing to stiffness of the legs, spasms, 
tremors, etc. A safeguard against any wrong diagnosis is 
provided by the accompanying anxiety, which makes 
him cling to his mother’s apron strings. The death of his 
brother and the death of his father in a psychosis 
precipitated the onset of his condition, which has been 
present since he was 14. He feels ashamed in front of 
anyone who sees him walking in this way and he regards 
that as natural. His model is a tabetic uncle, with whom 
he identified himself at the age of 13 on account of the 
accepted etiology (leading a dissolute life). The shame is 
merely appended to the symptoms and must relate to 
the other precipitating factor. His uncle was not the least 
ashamed of his gait. The connection between his shame 
and his gait was rational many years ago when he had 
gonorrhoea which was naturally noticeable in his gait, 
and even some years earlier, too, when constant (aim- 
less) erections interfered with his walking. The whole 
story of his youth, on the one hand, has its climax in the 
leg symptoms and, on the other hand, releases the affect 
belonging to it, and the 2 are soldered together only for 
his internal perception. 

1950A 1/276 

Letter 101. Retrospective fantasies (1899). 

In a letter, Freud wrote that a small bit of self- 
analysis has forced its way through, and confirmed that 
phantasies are products of later periods and are pro- 
jected back from the then present on to the earliest 
childhood , and the manner in which this occurs has also 
emerged, once more a verbal link. Another psychical 
element has been found which is regarded as of general 
significance and as being a preliminary stage of symp- 
toms. The dream pattern is capable of the most general 
application, and the key to hysteria, as well, really lies in 
dreams. 

1950A 1/277 

Letter 102. Hysteria and fantasies (1899). 

Hysterical headaches rest on an analogy in phantasy 
which equates the top with the bottom end of the body, 



so that an attack of migraine can be used to represent a 
forcible defloration, while, nevertheless, the whole ail- 
ment also represents a situation of wish fulfillment. In a 
woman patient there were constant states of despair 
with a melancholic conviction that she was of no use, 
was incapable of anything, etc. When she was a girl of 14 
she discovered that she had an imperforate hymen and 
was in despair that she would be no use as a wife. The 
diagnosis was melancholia, that is, fear of impotence. 
With another woman patient, there was a conviction that 
there really was such a thing as hysterical melancholia. 

1950A 1/278 

Letter 105. Importance of wish fulfillment (1899). 

It is not only dreams that are wish fulfillments but 
hysterical attacks as well. This is true of hysterical 
symptoms and probably, of every neurotic event too. A 
symptom is the wish fulfillment of the repressing 
thought when, for instance, it is a punishment, a 
self-punishment, the final replacement of self-gratifica- 
tion, of masturbation. One woman suffers from hysteri- 
cal vomiting because in phantasy she is pregnant, 
because she is so insatiable that she cannot put up with 
not having a baby by her last phantasy lover as well. But 
she must vomit too, because in that case she will be 
starved and emaciated, and will lose her beauty and no 
longer be attractive to anyone. Thus the sense of the 
symptom is a contradictory pair of wish fulfillments. A 
man turns red and sweats as soon as he sees one of a 
particular category of acquaintances. He is ashamed of a 
phantasy in which he figures as the deflowerer of every 
person he meets. 



1950A 1/279 

Letter 125. Choice of neurosis (1899). 

The problem of ‘choice of neurosis’ is discussed. The 
lowest sexual stratum is autoeroticism, which does 
without any psychosexual aim and demands only local 
feelings of satisfaction. It is succeeded by alloerotism 
(homo and heteroerotism); but it certainly also con- 
tinues to exist as a separate current. Hysteria (and its 
variant, obsessional neurosis) is alloerotic: its main path 
is identification with the person loved. Paranoia dissolves 
the identification once more; it reestablishes all the 
figures loved in childhood which have been abandoned 
and it dissolves the ego itself into extraneous figures. 
Paranoia is regarded as a forward surge of the autoerotic 
current, as a return to the standpoint prevailing then. 

14 



o 

ERIC 



23 



1950A 



1/322 



The perversion corresponding to it would be what is 
known as ‘idiopathic insanity’. The special relations of 
autoeroticism to the original ego would throw a clear 
light on the nature of this neurosis. 

1950A 1/283 

Project for a scientific psychology: Editor’s introduc- 
tion and key to abbreviations in the project (1966). 

The present translation of Project for a Scientific 
Psychology is a completely revised one, edited in 
accordance with the original manuscript. The ideas 
contained in the Project persisted, and eventually olos- 
somed into the theories of psychoanalysis. Freud was 
not a meticulously careful writer, and a certain number 
of obvious slips occur. These were corrected in this 
version, except where the mistake is a doubtful one or of 
special importance. Freud’s punctuation is unsystematic 
and in any case often differs from English usage. The 
main problem raised by Freud’s manuscript is his use of 
abbreviations. The Project was written in 2 or 3 weeks, 
left unfinished, and criticized severely at the time of its 
writing. There is very little in these pages to anticipate 
the technical procedures of psychoanalysis. Free associa- 
tion, the interpretation of unconscious material, and 
transference are barely hinted at. Only in the passages on 
dreams is there any anticipation of later clinica' develop- 
ments. All the emphasis in the Project is yon the 
environment’s impact upon the organism and the orga- 
nism’s reaction to it. The Project is a pre-id description 
of the mind. The abbreviations used in the Project are : Q 
= Quantity (of the intercellular order of magnitude); phi 
= system of permeable neurones; psi = system of 
impermeable neurones; omega = system of perceptual 
neurones; W = perception; V = idea; and M = motor 
image. 

1950A 1/295 

Project for a scientific psychology. General scheme-Part 
I: Introduction and sections 1-8(1895). 

The intention is to furnish a psychology that is a 
natural science: that is. to represent psychical processes 
as quantitatively determinate states of specifiable 
material particles. The first principal theorem is the 
quantitative conception (Qn). This is derived directly 
from pathological clinical observation especially where 
excessively intense ideas were concerned. The second 
principal theorem is the neurone theory. The nervous 
system consists of distinct and similarly constructed 
neurones, which have contact with one another through 
the mediums of a foreign substance, which terminate 



upon one another as they do upon portions of foreign 
tissue, in which certain lines of conduction are laid down 
in so far as the neurones receive excitations through cell 
processes (dendrites) and give them off through an axis 
cyclinder (axon). The hypothesis of there being 2 
systems of neurones, phi and psi, of which phi consists 
of permeable elements and psi of impermeable, seems to 
provide an explanation of one of the peculiarities of the 
nervous system, that of retaining and yet of remaining 
capable of receiving. The intercellular stimuli are of a 
comparatively small order of magnitude and of the same 
order as the resistances of the contact barriers. The 
nervous system has an inclination to a flight from pain. 
The transmission of quality is not durable; it leaves no 
traces behind and cannot be reproduced. There is a 
coincidence between the characteristics of consciousness 
and processes in the omega neurones which vary in 
parallel with them. 

I950A 1/312 

Project for a scientific psychology. General scheme— Part 
I: Sections 9-13 (1895). 

The amounts of excitation penetrate from outside to 
the endings of the phi system of permeable neurones. 
The qualitative characteristic of the stimuli now pro- 
ceeds unhindered through phi (the system of permeable 
neurones to psi) the system of impermeable neurones to 
omega (the system of perceptual neurones) where it 
generates sensation; it is represented by a particular 
period of neuronal motion, which is certainly not the 
same as that of the stimulus, but has a certain relation to 
it in accordance with a reduction formula. The nucleus 
of psi is connected with the paths by which endogenous 
quantities of excitation ascend. It is assumed that the 
endogenous stimuli are of an intercellular nature. The 
filling of the nuclear neurones in psi will have as its 
result an effort to discharge, an urgency which is 
released along the motor pathway. Pain has a peculiar 
quality, which makes itself felt along with the un- 
pleasure. If the mnemic image of the hostile object is 
freshly cathected in some way, a state arises which is not 
pain but which nevertheless has a resemblance to it. The 
residues of the 2 kinds of experiences of pain and of 
satisfaction are affects and wishful states. 

1950A 1/322 

Project for a scientific psychology. General scheme— Part 
I: Sections 14-18 (1895). 

With the hypotheses of wishful attraction and of the 
inclination to repression, the state of the system of 

15 



24 



1950A 1/335 

permeable neurones (phi) has been touched. These 2 
processes indicate than an organization has been formed 
in the system of impermeable neurones (psi) whose 
presence interferes with passages of quantity which on 
the first occasion occurred in a particular way; i.e., 
accompanied by satisfaction or pain. The ego in psi, 
which can be treated like the nervous system as a whole, 
will, when the processes in psi are uninfluenced, be made 
helpless and suffer injury. This will happen if, while it is 
in a wishful state, it newly cathects the memory of an 
object and then sets discharge in action. Both wishful 
cathexis and release for unpleasure, where the memory 
in question is cathected anew, can be biologically 
detrimental. During the process of wishing, inhibition by 
the ego brings about a moderated cathexis of the wished 
for object, which allows it to be cognized as not real. 
Simultaneously with the wishful cathexis of the mnemic 
image, the perception of it is present. Judging is a psi 
process which is only made possible by inhibition by the 
ego and which is evoked by the dissimilarity between the 
wishful cathexis of a memory and a perceptual cathexis 
that is similar to it. Reproductive thought has a practical 
aim and a biologically established end. The aim and end 
of all thought processes is to bring about a state of 
identity. Cognitive or judging thought seeks an identity 
with a bodily cathexis, reproductive thought seeks it 
with a psychical cathexis of an experience of one’s own. 



1950A 1/335 

Project for a scientific psychology. General scheme-Part 
I: Sections 19-21 and Appendix A (1895). 

The primary processes of the system of impermeable 
neurones (psi) are presented daily during sleep. The 
essential precondition of sleep is a lowering of the 
endogenous load in the psi nucleus. Dreams exhibit 
transitions to the waking state and to a mixture with 
normal psi processes; yet it is easy to sift out what is 
genuine and what is not in the nature of a dream. 
Dreams are devoid of motor discharge and , for the most 
part, of motor elements. The cohnections in dreams are 
partly nonsensical, partly feeble minded, or even mean- 
ingless or strangely crazy. Dream ideas are of a hallucina- 
tory kind; they awaken consciousness and meet with 
belief. The aim and sense of dreams can be established 
with certainty. Dreams are poorly remembered. Con- 
sciousness in dreams furnishes quality with as little 
trouble as in waking life. Consciousness of dream ideas is 
discontinuous. 



1950 A 1/347 

Project for a scientific psychology. Psychopathology- 
Part II: Sections 1-2 (1895). 

Every observer of hysteria is struck by the fact that 
hysterical patients are subject to a compulsion which is 
exercised by excessively intense ideas. Hysterical com- 
pulsion is unintelligible, incapable of being resolved by 
the activity of thought, and incongruous in its structure. 
There is a defensive process emanating from the ca- 
thected ego which results in hysterical repression and, 
along with it, in hysterical compulsion. To that extent 
the process seems to be differentiated from the primary 
process of the system of impermeable neurones. 



1950A 1/351 

Project for a scientific psychology. Psychopathology- 
Part II: Sections 3-6 (1895). 

The outcome of hysterical repression differs very 
widely from that of normal defense. It is quite generally 
the case that we avoid thinking of what arouses only 
unpleasure, and we do this by directing our thoughts to 
something else. Hysterical repression takes place with 
the help of symbol formation, of displacement on to 
other neurones. Hysterical compulsion originates from a 
peculiar kind of symbol formation which is probably a 
primary process. Although it does not usually happen in 
psychical life that a memory arouses an affect which it 
did not give rise to as an experience, this is nevertheless 
something quite usual in the case of a sexual idea, 
precisely because the retardation of puberty is a general 
characteristic of the organization. The disturbance of the 
normal psychical process had 2 determinants: 1) that the 
sexual release was attached to a memory instead of to an 
experience; and 2) that the sexual release took place 
prematurely. It is the business of the ego not to permit 
any release of affect, because this at the same time 
permits a primary process. 



1950A 1/360 

Project for a scientific psychology. Attempt to represent 
normal psi processes-Part III (1895). 

Attention consists in establishing the psychical state 
of expectation even for those perceptions which do not 
coincide in part with wishful cathexes. Attention is 
biologically justified; it is only a question of guiding the 
ego as to which expectant cathexis it is to establish and 




16 



this purpose is served by the indications of quality. 
Speech association makes cognition posable. The indica- 
tions of speech discharge put thought processes on a 
level with perceptual processes, lend them reality, and 
make memory of them possible. It is characteristic of 
the process of cognitive thought that during it, attention 
is, from the first, directed to the indications of thought 
discharge, to the indications of speech. A bound state, 
which combines high cathexis with small current, 
mechanically characterizes the processes of thought. For 
the ego, the biological rule of attention runs: If an 
indication of reality appears, then the perceptual 
cathexis which is simultaneously present is to be 
hypercathected. Thought accompanied by a cathexis of 
the indications of thought reality or the indications of 
speech is the highest, securest form of cognitive thought 
process. Memory consists in facilitations that are not 
altered by a rise in the level of cathexis; but there are 
facilitations that come into effect only ait a particular 
level. Alongside of cognitive and practical thought, there 
is a reproductive, remembering thought, which in part 
enters into practical thought, but does not exhaust it. 
Thought may lead to unpleasure or to contradiction. 



1950A 1/388 

Project for a scientific psychology. Attempt to represent 
normal psi processes-Part III: Appendices B and C 
(1895). 



There are 3 ways in which the neurones affect one 
another: 1) they transfer quantity to one another; 2) 
they transfer quality to one another; and 3) they have an 
exciting effect on one another. The perceptual processes 
involve consciousness and would only produce their 
further psychical effects after becoming conscious. The 
nature of quantity (Q) is discussed. Q appears in 2 
distinguishable forms. The first of these is Q in flow, 
passing through a neurone or from one neurone to 
another. The second, more static, form is shown by a 
cathected neurone filled with Q. Q would appear to be 
measurable in 2 ways: by the height of the level of 
cathexis within a neurone and by the amount of flow 
between cathexes. Whatever may be the precise details 
of the mechanism responsible for bringing about the 
transformation of free into bound Q, it is evident that 
Freud attached the greatest importance to the 
distinction itself. 



1893A 2/1 

VOL. II Studies on Hysteria (1893-1895) 

2/lx 

Studies on Hysteria (1955). Editor’s introduction and 
prefaces to the first and second editions. 

The present translation by James and Alix Strachey 
of Studies on Hysteria includes Breuer’s contributions, 
but is otherwise based on the German edition of 1925, 
containing Freud’s extra footnotes. Some historical 
notes on the Studies on Hysteria are presented including 
Breuer’s treatment of Fraulein Anna 0., on which the 
whole work is founded, and the case of Frau Emma 
von N. which was the first one treated by the cathartic 
method. It was through the study of the case of Frau 
Cacilie M. that led directly to publication of “Prelimi- 
nary Communication”. The bearing of these studies of 
hysteria on psychoanalyses is discussed. It is thought 
that the most important of Freud’s achievements is his 
invention of the first instrument for the scientific ex- 
amination of the human mind. In the years immediately 
following the Studies, Freud abandoned more and more 
of the machinery of deliberate suggestion and came to 
rely more and more on the patient’s flow of free asso- 
ciations. Freud originated the technical developments, 
together with the vital theoretical concepts of resistance, 
defense, and repression which arose from them. Breuer 
originated the notion of hypnoid states, and it seems 
possible that he was responsible for the terms catharsis 
and abreaction. The second edition of Studies on 
Hysteria appears without any alterations, though the 
opinions and methods which were put forward in the 
first edition have since undergone far reaching and pro- 
found developments. The initial views are not regarded 
as errors but as valuable first approximations to knowl- 
edge which could only be fully acquired after long and 
continuous efforts. 

1893A 2/1 

Studies on Hysteria (1893—1895). Chapter I. On the 
psychical mechanism of hysterical phenomena: Prelimi- 
nary communication (1893) (Breuer and Freud). 

A great variety of different forms and symptoms of 
hysteria which have been traced to precipitating factors 
include neuralgias and anesthesias of various kinds, con- 
tractures and paralyses, hysterical attacks and epileptoid 
convulsions, chronic vomiting and anorexia, etc. The 
connection between the precipitating event and the 
development of hysteria is often quite clear while at 
other times the connection is ‘symbolic.’ Observation of 
these latter cases establishes an analogy between the 
pathogenesis of common hysteria and that of traumatic 
neurosis and justify an extension of the concept of 
traumatic hysteria, it was found that each individual 
hysterical symptom immediately and permanently dis- 
appeared when the event by which it was provoked was 

17 



o 

ERIC 



26 



1895D 2/21 



clearly brought to light and when the patient described 
the event in great detail and had put the affect into 
words. The fading of a memory or the losing of its affect 
depends on various factors, the most important of these 
is whether there has been an energetic reaction to the 
event that provokes an affect. The memories correspond 
to traumas that have not been sufficiently abreacted. 
The splitting of consciousness which is so striking in the 
well known classical cases under the form of double con* 
science is present to a rudimentary degree in every 
hysteria. The basis of hysteria is the existence of 
hypnoid states. Charcot gave a schematic description of 
the major hysterical attack, according to which 4 phases 
can be distinguished in a complete attack: l)the 
epileptoid phase, 2) the phase of large movements, 
3) the phase of attitudes passionelles (the hallucinatory 
phase), and 4) the phase of terminal delirium. The 
psychotherapeutic procedure has a curative effect on 
hysteria: It brings to an end the operative force of the 
idea which was not abreacted in the first instance, by 
allowing its strangulated affect to find a way out 
through speech, and it subjects it to associative correc- 
tion by introducing it into normal consciousness or by 
removing it through the physician’s suggestion. 



1895D 2/21 

Studies on Hysteria (1893—1895). Chapter II. Case 
histories: 1 Fraulein Anna 0. (Breuer). 

The case history of Anna O. is presented. Illness 
started at 21 years of age and the course of illness fell 
into several clearly separable phase: latent incubation; 
the manifest illness; a period of persisting somnambu- 
lism, subsequently alternating with more normal states; 
and gradual cessation of the pathological states and 
symptoms. Throughout her illness, Fraulein Anna 0. fell 
into a somnolent state every afternoon and after sunset 
this period passed into a deeper sleep or hypnosis called 
“clouds”. During the ‘other’ states of consciousness 
(called absences) she would complain of lost time and of 
a gap in her train of conscious thought. If she was able 
to narrate the hallucinations she had had in the course of 
the day, she would wake up with a clear mind, calm and 
cheerful. The essential features of this phenomenon, the 
mounting up and intensification of her absences into her 
autohypnosis in the evening, the effect of the products 
of her imagination as psychical stimuli, and the easing 
and removal of her state of stimulation when she gave 
utterance to them in her hypnosis, remained constant 
throughout the whole 18 months during which she was 
under observation. The psychical characteristics, present 
in Fraulein AnnaO. while she was still completely 
healthly, acted as predisponsing causes for her sub- 
sequent hysterical illness. One was her monotonous 
family life and the absence of adequate intellectual oc- 
cupation which left her with an unemployed surplus of 



mental liveliness and energy, and this found an outlet in 
the constant activity of her imagination. The second 
characteristic was her habit of daydreaming which laid 
the foundation for a dissociation of her mental 
personality. 



1895D 2/48 

Studies on Hysteria (1893—1895). Chapter n. Case 
histories: 2. Frau Emmy von N. (Freud). 

The case history of Emmy von N. is discussed. On 
May 1 , 1889, Freud took on the case of a woman whose 
symptoms and personality interested him so greatly that 
he devoted a large part of his time to her and determined 
to do all he could for her recovery. She was a hysteric 
and could be put into a state of somnambulism with the 
greatest ease. Delirium was the last considerable distur- 
bance in Frau Emmy von N’s condition. Hypnosis was 
used primarily for the purpose of giving her maxims 
which were to remain constantly present in her mind 
and to protect her from relapsing into similar conditions 
when she got home. The mildness of her deliria and 
hallucinations, the change in her personality and store of 
memories when she was in a state of artificial somnam- 
bulism, the anesthesia in her painful leg, certain data 
revealed in her anamnesis, her ovarian neuralgia, etc., 
admit of no doubt as to the hysterical nature of the 
illness or of the patient. The psychical symptoms in this 
case of hysteria with very little conversion can be 
divided into alterations of mood, phobias, and abulias. 
These phobias and abulias were, for the most part, of 
traumatic origin. The distressing effects attached to her 
traumatic experiences had remained unresolved. Her 
memory exhibited a lively activity which brought her 
traumas with their accompanying affects bit by bit into 
her present day consciousness. 

1895D 2/106 

Studies on Hysteria (1893—1895). Chapter II. Case 
histories: 3. Miss Lucy R. (Freud). 

At the end of the year 1892, Miss Lucy R. was re- 
ferred to Freud by an acquaintance who was treating her 
for chronically recurrent suppurative rhinitis. She was 
suffering from depression and fatigue and was tormented 
by subjective sensations of smell. Freud concluded that 
experiences which have played an important pathogenic 
part, and all their subsidiary concomitants, were ac- 
curately retained in the patient’s memory even when 
they seemed to be forgotten, when he is unable to call 
them to mind. Before hysteria can be acquired for the 
first time, one essential condition must be fulfilled: an 
idea must be intentionally repressed from consciousness 
and excluded from associative modification. This inten- 
tional repression is also the basis for the conversion, 
whether total or partial, of the sum of excitation. The 

18 



o 



Z7 



1895D 2/186 



sum of excitation, being cut off from psychical asso- 
ciation, finds its way all the mors easily along the wrong 
path to a somatic innervation. The basis for repression 
itself can only be a feeling of unpleasure, the incompat- 
ibility between the single idea that is to be repressed and 
the dominant mass of ideas constituting the ego. It was 
found that as one symptom was removed, another devel- 
oped to take its place. The case history of Miss Lucy R. 
was regarded as a model instance of one particular type 
of hysteria, namely the form of this illness which can be 
acquired even by a person of sound heredity, as a result 
of appropriate experiences. The actual traumatic 
moment is the one at which the incompatibility forces 
itself upon the ego and at which the latter decides on the 
repudiation of the incompatible idea. When this process 
occurs for the first time there comes into being a nucleus 
and center of crystallization for the formation of' a 
psychical group divorced from the ego*, a group around 
which everything which would imply an acceptance of 
the incompatible idea subsequently collects. The 
splitting of consciousness in these cases of acquired 
hysteria is accordingly a deliberate and intentional one. 
It was concluded that the therapeutic process in this case 
consisted in compelling the psychical group that had 
been split off to unite once more with the ego- 
consciousness. 



1895D 2/125 

Studies on Hysteria. (1893-1895). Chapter II. Case 
histories: 4. Katharina (Freud). 

The case history of Katharina, an employee at a 
mountain retreat that Freud visited, is presented. The 
girl approached him with a problem of an anxiety attack 
that had first appeared 2 years previously. Katharina 
realized that her uncle had been making advances to her 
and that he had also been involved with her cousin. It 
was hoped that she, Katharina, whose sexual sensibility 
had been injured at an early age, derived some benefit 
from the conversation with Freud. Katharina agreed that 
what Freud interpolated into her story was probably 
true; but she was not in a position to recognize it as 
something she had experienced. The case was fitted into 
the schematic picture of an acquired hysteria. In every 
analysis of a case of hysteria based on sexual traumas, 
the impressions from the presexual period which 
produce no effect on the child attain traumatic power at 
a later date as memories, when the girl or married 
women acquires an understanding of sexual life. The 
anxiety which Katharina suffered in her attacks was a 
hysterical one; that is, it was a reproduction of the 
anxiety which had appeared in connection with each of 
the sexual traumas. 



1895D 2/135 

Studies on Hysteria (1893-1895). Chapter II. Case 
histories: 5. Fraulein Elisabeth von R. (Freud). 

The case of Fraulein Elisabeth von R., a young 
patient of 24, who walked with the upper part of her 
body bent forward, but without making use of any sup- 
port, is studied. The diagnosis of hysteria was proposed 
for the following reasons: l)The descriptions and 
character of her pains were indefinite. 2) If the hyper- 
algesic skin and muscles of her legs were touched, her 
face assumed a peculiar expression, which was one of 
pleasure rather than pain. For a long time, Freud was 
unable to grasp the connection between the events in her 
illness and her actual symptoms, the obscurity due to 
the fact that analysis pointed to the occurrence of a 
conversion of psychical excitation into physical pain. It 
was thought that the conversion did not take place in 
connection with her impressions when they were fresh, 
but in connection with her memories of them. Such a 
course of events is not unusual in hysteria and plays a 
regular part in the genesis of hysterical symptoms. This 
assertion is substantiated by the following instances. 
Fraulein Rosalia H., 23 years old, had for some years 
been undergoing training as a singer, had a good voice, 
but complained that in certain parts of its compass it 
was not under her control. A connection was established 
between her singing and her hysterical paraesthesia, a 
connection for which the way was prepared by the 
organic sensations set up by singing. To rid her of this 
retention hysteria Freud tried to get her to reproduce all 
her agitating experiences and to abreact them after the 
event. Frau Cacilie M. suffered from an extremely 
violent facial neuralgia which appeared suddenly 2 or 3 
times a year, and lasted from 5 to 10 days, resisted any 
kind of treatment and then ceases abruptly. Her case 
involved conflict and defense. The neuralgia had come to 
be indicative of a particular psychical excitation by the 
usual method of conversion, but afterwards, it could be 
set going through associative reverberations from her 
mental life, or symbolic conversion, in fact the same 
behavior found in the case of Elisabeth von R. 



1895D 2/186 

Studies on Hysteria (1893-1895). Chapter III. Theo- 
retical Section (Breuer): 1. Are all hysterical phenom- 
ena ideogenic? 

It is not believed that all the phenomena of hysteria 
are all ideogenic, that is, determined by ideas. This 
theory differs from Moebius who defined as hysterical 
all pathological phenomena that are caused by ideas. 
Hysteria is regarded as a clinical picture which has been 
empirically discovered and is based on observation. 
Hysteria must remain a clinical unity even if it turns out 
that its phenomena are determined by various causes, 



19 

28 



o 



1895D 2/192 



and that some of them are brought about by a psychical 
mechanism and others without it. It seems certain that 
many phenomena described as hysterical are not caused 
by ideas alone. Even though some of the phenomena of 
hysteria are ideogenic, nevertheless it is precisely they 
that must be described as the specifically hysterical ones, 
and it is the investigation of them, the discovery of their 
psychical origins, which constitutes the most important 
recent step forward in the theory of the disorder. The 
concept of excitations which flow away or have to be 
abreacted, is fundamentally important in hysteria and 
for the theory of neurosis in general. 

1895D 2/192 

Studies on Hysteria (1893-1 895V Chapter III. Theoret- 
ical Section (Breuor): 2. Intracerebral tonic excitations- 
affects. 

The 2 extreme conditions of the central nervous 
system are a clear waking state and dreamless sleep. A 
transition between these is afforded by conditions of 
varying degrees of decreasing clarity. When the brain is 
performing actual work, a greater consumption of 
energy is no doubt required than when it is merely pre- 
pared to perform work. Spontaneous awakening can 
take place in complete quiet and darkness without any 
external stimulus, thus demonstrating that the develop- 
ment of energy is based on the vital process of the 
cerebral elements themselves. Speech, the outcome of 
the experience of many generations, distinguishes with 
admirable delicacy between those forms and degrees of 
heightening of excitation which are still useful for 
mental activity because they raise the free energy of all 
cerebral functions uniformly, and those forms and 
degrees which restrict that activity because they partly 
increase and partly inhibit these psychical functions in a 
manner that is not uniform. The first are given the name 
of incitement, and the second excitment. While incite- 
ment only arouses the urge to employ the increased 
excitation functionally, excitement seeks to discharge 
itself in more or less violent ways which are almost or 
even actually pathological. A disturbance of the dynamic 
equilibrium of the nervous system is what makes up the 
psychical side of affects. All the disturbances of mental 
equilibrium which are called acute affects go along with 
an increase of excitation. Affectr that are active, level 
out the increased excitation by motor discharge . If, how- 
ever, the affect can find no discharge of excitation of 
any kind, then the intracerebral excitation is powerfully 
increased, but is employed neither in associat’ve nor in 
motor activity. 

1895 2/203 

Studies on Hysteria (1893—1895). Chapter III. Theo- 
retical Section (Breuer): 3. Hysterical conversion. 

Resistances in normal people against the passage of 
cerebral excitation to the vegetative organs correspond 



to the insulation of electrical conducting lines. At points 
at which they are abnormally weak they are broken 
through when the tension of cerebral excitation is high, 
and this, the affective excitation, passes over to the 
peripheral organs. There ensues an abnormal expression 
of emotion with 2 factors responsible for this. The first 
is a high degree of intracerebral excitation which has 
failed to be leveled down either by ideational activities 
or by motor discharge, or which is too great to be dealt 
with in this way. The second is an abnormal weakness of 
the resistances in particular paths of conduction. Intra- 
cerebral excitation and the excitatory process in pe- 
ripheral paths are of reciprocal magnitudes: the former 
increases if and so long as no reflex is released; it 
diminishes and disappears when it has been transformed 
into peripheral nervous excitation. Thus it seems under- 
standable that no observable affect is generated if the 
idea that should have given rise to it immediately 
releases an abnormal reflex into which the excitation 
flows away as soon as it is generated. The ‘hysterical 
conversion’ is then complete. Hysterical phenomena 
(abnormal reflexes) do not seem to be ideogenic even to 
intelligent patients who are good observers, because the 
idea that gave rise to them is no longer colored with 
affect and no longer marked out among other ideas and 
memories. The discharge of affect follows the principle 
of least resistance and takes place along those paths 
whose resistances have already been weakened by con- 
current circumstances. The genesis of hysterical phe- 
nomena that are determined by traumas finds a perfect 
analogy in the hysterical conversion of the psychical 
excitation which originates, not from external stimuli 
nor fiom the inhibition of normal psychical reflexes, but 
from the inhibition of the course of association. In all 
cases there must be convergence of several factors before 
a hysterical symptom can be generated in anyone who 
has hitherto been normal. Two ways in which affective 
ideas can be excluded from association were observed: 
through defense and in situations where the idea cannot 
be remembered such as in hypnosis or states similar to 
hypnosis. The latter seem to be of extreme importance 
for the theory of hysteria. 

1895D 2/215 

Studies on Hysteria (1893-1895). Chapter III. Theo- 
retical Section (Breuer): 4. Hypnoid states. 

The baas of hysteria is the existence of hypnoid 
states. The importance of these states which resemble 
hypnosis, lies in the amnesia that accompanies them and 
in their power to bring about the splitting of the mind. 
It must also be pointed out that conversion (the ideo- 
genic production of somatic phenomena) can also come 
about apart from hypnoid states. True autohypnoses 
(originating spontaneously) are found in a number of 
fully developed hysterias, occurring with varying fre- 
quency and duration, and often alternating rapidly with 



20 



o 



<3 



1895D 2/240 



normal waking states. What happens during auto- 
hypnotic states is subject to more or less total amnesia in 
waking life. The hysterical conversion takes place more 
easily in autohypnosis than in the waking state, just as 
suggested ideas are realized physically as hallucinations 
and movements so much more easily in artificial (non- 
spontaneous) hypnosis. Neither absence of mind: 
(hypnoid state) during energetic work nor unemotional 
twilight states are pathogenic; on the other hand, 
reveries that are filled with emotion and states of fatigue 
arising from protracted affects are pathogenic. The 
method by which pathogenic autohypnosis would seem 
to develop is by affect being introduced into a habitual 
reverie. It is not known whether reveries may not them- 
selves be able to produce the same pathological effect as 
auto-hypnosis, and whether the same may not also be 
true of a protracted affect of anxiety. The term hypnoid 
points to auto-hypnosis itself, the importance of which 
in the genesis of hysterical phenomena rests on the fact 
that it makes conversion easier and protects (by 
amnesia) the converted ideas from wearing away, a pro- 
tection which ultimately leads to an increase in the 
psychical splitting. 



1895D 2/222 

Studies on Hysteria (1893-1895). Chapter III. Theoret- 
ical Section (Breuer): 5. Unconscious ideas and ideas 
inadmissible to consciousness-Splitting of the mind. 

Ideas that we are aware of are called conscious. A 
great deal of what is described as mood comes from 
ideas that exist and operate beneath the threshold of 
consciousness. The whole conduct of our life is con- 
stantly influenced by subconscious ideas. All intuitive 
activity is directed by ideas which are to a large extent 
subconscious. Only the clearest and most intense ideas 
are perceived by self-consciousness, while the great mass 
of current but weaker ideas remains unconscious. There 
seems to be no theoretical difficulty in recognizing 
unconscious ideas as causes of pathological phenomena. 
The existence of ideas that are inadmissible to conscious- 
ness is pathological. Janet regards a particular form of 
congenital mental weakness as the disposition to 
hysteria. Freud and Breuer say that it is not the case that 
the splitting of consciousness occurs because the patients 
are weak minded; they appear to be weakminded 
because their mental activity is divided and only a part 
of its capacity is at the disposal of their conscious 
thought. What underlies dissociation is an excess of 
efficiency, the habitual coexistence of 2 heterogeneous 
trains of ideas. In their initial stages, hysterias of a severe 
degree usually exhibit a syndrome that may be described 
as acute hysteria. The weakness of mind caused by a 
splitting of the psyche seems to be a basis of the 
suggestibility of some hysterical patients. The uncon- 



scious split of mind in hysteria is preeminently sug- 
gestible on account of the poverty and incompleteness 
of its ideational content. 



1895D 2/240 

Studies on Hysteria (1893-1895). Chapter III. Theo- 
retical Section (Breuer): 6. Innate disposition— 
Development of hysteria. 



Most of the hysteria phenomena that Freud and 
Breuer have been endeavoring to understand can be 
based on an innate idiosyncracy. The capacity to acquire 
hysteria is undoubtedly linked with an idiosyncracy of 
the person concerned. The reflex theory of symptoms 
(nervous symptoms) should not be completely rejected. 
The idiosyncracy of the nervous system and of the mind 
seems to explain some familiar properties of many 
hysterical patients. The surplus of excitation which is 
liberated by their nervous system when in a state of rest 
determines their incapacity to tolerate a monotonous 
life and boredom and their craving for sensations which 
drive them to interrupt this monotony with incidents of 
which the most prominent are pathological phenomena. 
They are often supported in this by autosuggestion. A 
surplus of excitation also gives rise to pathological 
phenomena in the motor sphere, often tic-like move- 
ments. Like the stigmata, a number of other nervous 
symptoms, some pains and vasomotor phenomena and 
perhaps purely motor convulsive attacks, are not caused 
by ideas but are direct results of the fundamental 
abnormality of the nervous system. Closest to them are 
the ideogenic phenomena, simply conversations of affec- 
tive excitation. These phenomena are, by repetition, a 
purely somatic hysterical symptom while the idea that 
gave rise to it is fended off and therefore repressed. The 
most numerous and important of the fended-off and 
converted ideas have a sexual content. The tendency 
towards fending off what is sexual is intensified by the 
fact that in young unmarried women sensual excitation 
has an admixture of anxiety, of fear of what is coming, 
what is unknown and half-suspected, whereas in normal 
and healthy young men it is unmixed aggressive instinct. 
Besides sexual hysteria, there are also hysterias due to 
fright, traumatic hysteria proper, which constitutes one 
of the best known and recognized forms of hysteria 
Another constitutent of the hysterical disposition is the 
hypnoid state, the tendency to autohypnosis. The 
hypnoid element is most clearly manifested in hysterical 
attacks and in those states which can be described as 
acute hysteria. The essential change that occurs in 
hysteria is that the mental state becomes temporarily or 
permanently similar to that of a hypnotized subject. 



21 




o 



1895D 2/253 
1895D 2/253 

Studies on Hysteria (1893—1895). Chapter IV. The 
psychotherapy of hysteria (Freud). 

The psychotherapy of hysteria is discussed. Each 
individual hysterical symptom immediately and per- 
manently disappears when the memory of the event by 
which it was provoked was brought to light along with 
its accompanying affect and when the patient had 
described that event in the greatest possible detail and 
had put the affect into words. The etiology of the 
acquisition of neuroses is to be looked for in sexual 
factors. Different sexual factor produce different 
pictures of neurotic disorders. Tne neuroses which 
commonly occur are mostly to be described as mixed. 
Pure forms of hysteria and obsessional neurosis are rare; 
as a rule these 2 neuroses are combined with anxiety 
neurosis. Not all hysterical symptoms are psychogenic 
and they all cannot be alleviated by a psychotherapeutic 
procedure. A number of patients could not be hypno- 
tized, although their diagnosis was one of hysteria and it 
seemed probable that the psychical mechanism described 
by Freud and Breuer operated in them. For these 
patients, Freud by means of psychical work had to 
overcome a psychical force in the patients- which was 
opposed to the pathogenic ideas becoming conscious. 
The pathogenic idea is always close at hand and can be 
reached by associations that are easily accessible, just a 
question of removing the subjects will. Once a picture 
has emerged from the patients’s memory, it becomes 
fragmentary and obscure in proportion as he proceeds 
with his description of it. The patient appears to be 
getting rid of it by turning it into words. It is found 
from cases in which guessing the way in which things are 
connected and telling the patient before uncovering it 
that therapists are not in a position to force anything on 
the patient about things of which he is ostensibly 
ignorant or to influence the products of the analysis by 
arousing an expectation. An external obstacle to success- 
ful psychotherapy happens when the patient’s relation 
to the therapist is disturbed such as if there is personal 
estrangement, if the patient is seized by a dread of 
becoming accustomed to the therapist personally or of 
losing independence in relation to him, or if the patient 
is frightened at finding she is transferred her distressing 
ideas onto the therapist. 

1895D 2/307 

Studies on Hysteria (1893-1895). Appendix A: The 
chronology of the case of Frau Emmy von N. 
Appendix B: List of writings by Freud dealing prin- 
cipally with conversion hysteria. 

The chronology of the case of Frau Emmy von N. is 
presented. There are serious inconsistencies in the dating 
of the case history. There is reason to believe that Freud 
altered the place of Frau Emmy’s residence. It is possible 



that he also altered the time as an extra precaution 
against betraying his patient’s identity. A list of writings 
by Freud dealing principally with conversion hysteria is 
also presented. They are dated from 1886 to 1910 and 
include: The Observation of Pronounced Hemi- 
Anesthesia in a Hysterical Male; Hysteria in Villaret’s 
Handworterbuch', A Letter- to Josef Breuer; On the 
Theory of Hysterical Attacks; A Case of Successful 
Treatment by Hypnotism; On the Psychical Mechanism 
of Hysterical Phenomena; The Neuro-Psychoses of 
Defense; Studies on Hysteria; Project for a Scientific 
Psychology; and the Aetiology of Hysteria. 



VOL. Ill Early Psycho-Analytic Publications 
(1893-1899) 



1906B 3/3 

Preface to Freud’s shorter writings (1893-1906) 

Volume Three of the Standard Edition includes the 
majority of the contents of the first of Freud’s 5 
collected volumes of shorter papers. The volume 
contains 2 papers which Freud omitted from his 
collection: the discussion on forgetting, which was 
afterwards developed into the first chapter of The 
Psychopathology of Everyday Life and the paper on 
Screen Memories . It also includes the list of abstracts of 
Freud’s earlier works, which he himself drew up with an 
eye to his application for a professorship. The preface to 
Freud’s collection of shorter writings on the theory of 
the neuroses from the years 1893 to 1906 is presented. 
The collection serves as an introduction and supplement 
to the larger publications dealing with the same topics. 
The Obituary of J.-M. Charcot is first of the collection 
of short papers. 

1893F 3/9 
Charcot (1893) 

From October, 1885, to February, 1886, Freud 
worked at the Salpetriere in Paris under Charcot. This 
was the turning point in Freud’s career, for during this 
period his interest shifted from neuropathology to 
psychopathology, from physical science to psychology. 
The obituary, written only a few days after Charcot’s 
death, is some evidence of the greatness of Freud’s 
admiration for him. Charcot treated hysteria as just 
another topic in neuropathology. He gave a complete 
description of its phenomena, demonstrated that they 
had their own laws and uniformities, and showed how to 
recognize the symptoms which enable a diagnosis of 
hysteria to be made. Heredity was to be regarded as the 
sole cause of hysteria. Charcot’s concern with hypnotic 



31 



22 



3/62 



phenomena in hysterical patients led to very great 
advances in this important field of hitherto neglected 
and despised facts, for the weight of his name put an end 
to any doubt about the reality of hypnotic 
manifestations. 

1893H 3/25 

On the psychical mechanism of hysterical phenomena: 
A lecture (1893). 

The English translation, “On the Psychical Mechanism 
of Hysterical Phenomena,” is a shorthand report of a 
lecture delivered and revised by Freud. It is pointed out 
that all the modern advances made in the understanding 
and knowledge of hysteria are derived from the work of 
Charcot. There is an affectively colored experience 
behind most phenomena of hysteria. If this experience is 
equated with the major traumatic experience underlying 
traumatic hysteria the following thesis is derived: there 
is a complete analogy between traumatic paralysis and 
common, nontraumatic hysteria. The memories in 
hysterical patients, which have become pathogenic, 
occupy an exceptional position as regards the wearing 
away process; and observation shows that, in the case of 
all the events which have become determinants of 
hysterical phenomena, the psychical traumas have not 
been completely abreacted. There are 2 groups of 
conditions under which memories become pathogenic. 
In the first group, the memories to which the hysterical 
phenomena can be traced back have for their content 
ideas which involve a trauma so great that the nervous 
system has not sufficient power to deal with it in any 
way. In a second group of cases the reason for the 
absence of a reaction lies not in the content of the 
psychical trauma but in other circumstances. 



1894A 3/43 

The neuro-psychoses of defence (1894). 

The problems of the neuroses, which Freud 
investigated during the years 1893 to 1894, fell into 2 
fairly distinct groups, concerned respectively with what 
were later to become known as the actual neuroses and 
the psychoneuroses. After making a detailed study of a 
number of nervous patients suffering from phobias and 
obsessions, Freud was led to attempt an explanation of 
these symptoms, thus arriving successfully at the origin 
of the pathological ideas in new and different cases. The 
syndrome of hysteria justifies the assumption of a 
splitting of consciousness, accompanied by the 
formation of separate psychical groups. The character- 
istic factor in hysteria is not the splitting of conscious- 
ness but the capacity for conversion. If someone with a 
disposition to neurosis lacks the aptitude for conversion, 
but if, in order to fend off an incompatible idea, he sets 
about separating it from its affect, then that affect is 



455-582 0 - 72-3 



obliged to remain in the psychical sphere. In all cases that 
Freud analyzed, it was the subject’s sexual life that had 
given rise to a distressing affect of precisely tne same 
quality as that attaching to his obsession. In 2 instances 
considered, defense against the incompatible idea was 
effected by separating it from its affect; the idea itself 
remained in consciousness, even though weakened and 
isolated. In another type of defense the ego rejects the 
incompatible idea together with its affect and behaves as 
if the idea had never occurred to the ego at all. But from 
the moment at which this has been successfully done the 
subject is in a psychosis, which can only be classified as 
hallucinatory confusion. The content of a hallucinatory 
psychosis of this sort consists precisely in the 
accentuation of the idea which was threatened by the 
precipitating cause of the onset of illness. The ego has 
fended off the incompatible idea through escape into 
psychosis. In summary, a working hypothesis for the 
neuroses of defense is as follows: In mental functions 
something is to be distinguished (a quota of affect or 
sum of excitation) which possess all the characteristics 
of a quantity which is capable of increase, diminution, 
displacement and discharge, and which is spread over the 
memory traces of ideas. 



3/62 

The neuro-psychoses of defence (1894). Appendix: The 
emergence of Freud’s fundamental hypotheses. 

With the first paper on the neuropsychoses of 
defense, Freud gives public expression, to many of the 
most fundamental of the theoretical notions on which 
all his later work rests. At the time of writing this paper, 
Freud was deeply involved in the first series of 
psychological investigations. In his “History of the 
Psycho-Analytic Movement”, Freud declared that the 
theory of repression, or defense, to give it its alternative 
name, is the cornerstone on which the whole structure 
of psychoanalysis rests. The clinical hypothesis of 
defense, however, is itself necessarily based on the 
theory of cathexis. Throughout this period, Freud 
appeared to regard the cathectic processes as material 
events. The pleasure principle, no less fundamental than 
the constancy principle, was equally present, though 
once more only by implication. Freud regarded the 2 
principles as intimately connected and perhaps identical. 
It is probably correct to suppose that Freud was 
regarding the quota of affect as a particular 
manifestation of the sum of excitation. Affect is what is 
usually involved in the cases of hysteria and obsessional 
neurosis with which Freud was chiefly concerned in 
early days. For that reason he tended at that time to 
describe the displaceable quantity as a quota of affect 
rather than in more general terms as an excitation; and 
this habit seems to have persisted even in the 

23 

32 



0 



1895C 3/71 



met? physical papers where a more precise differentiation 
might have contributed to the clarity of his argument. 

1895C 3/71 

Obsessions and phobias: Their psychical mechanism and 
their aetiology (1895). 

Obsessions and phobias cannot be included under 
neurasthenia proper. Since the patients afflicted with 
these symptoms are no more often neurasthenics than 
not. Obsessions and phobias are separate neuroses, with 
a special mechanism and etiology. Traumatic obsessions 
and phobias are allied to the symptoms of hysteria. Two 
constituents are found in every obsession: 1) an idea 
that forces itself upon the patient; ?nd 2) an associated 
emotional state. In many true obsessions it is plain that 
the emotional state is the principal thing, since that state 
persists unchanged while the idea associated with it 
varies. It is the false connection between the emotional 
state and the associated idea that accounts for the 
absurdity so characteristic of obsessions. The great 
difference between phobias is that in the latter the 
emotion is always one of anxiety, fear. Among the 
phobias, 2 groups may be differentiated according to the 
nature of the object feared: 1) common phobias, an 
exaggerated fear of things that everyone detests or fears 
to some extent; and 2) contingent phobias, the fear of 
special conditions that inspire no fear in the normal 
man. The mechanism of phobias is entirely different 
from that of obsessions - nothing is ever found but the 
emotional state of anxiety which brings up all the ideas 
adapted to become the subject of a phobia. Phobias then 
are a part of the anxiety neurosis, which has a sexual 
origin. 

3/83 

Obsessions and phobias: Their psychical mechanism and 
their aetiology (1895). Appendix: Freud’s views on 
phobias. 

Freud’s earliest approach to the problem of phobias 
was in his first paper on the neuropsychoses of defense. 
In the earliest of his papers, he attributed the same 
mechanism to the great majority of phobias and 
obsessions, while excepting the purely hysterical phobias 
and the group of typical phobias of which agoraphobia is. 
a model. This latter distinction is the crucial one, for it 
implies a distinction between phobias having a psychical 
basis and those without. This distinction links with what 
were later to be known as the psychoneuroses and the 
actual neuroses. In the paper on obsessions and phobias, 
the distinction seems to be made not between 2 
different groups of phobias but between the obsessions 
and the phobias, the latter being declared to be a part of 
the anxiety neurosis. In the paper on anxiety neurosis, 
the main distinction was not between obsessions and 
phobias but between phobias belonging to obsessional 

33 



neurosis and those belonging to anxiety neurosis. There 
remain undetermined links between phobias, hysteria, 
obsessions, and anxiety neurosis. 

1895B 3/90. 

On the grounds for detaching a particular syndrome 
from neurasthenia under the description “anxiety 
neurosis” (1895). Editors’ note, introduction and Part 1. 
The clinical symptomatology of anxiety neurosis. 

The paper, “On the Grounds for Detaching a 
Particular Syndrome from Neurasthenia under the 
Description Anxiety Neurosis” may be regarded as the 
first part of a trail that leads through the whole of 
Freud’s writings. According to Freud, it is difficult to 
make any statement of general validity about 
neurasthenia, so long as it is used to cover all the things 
which Beard has included under it. It was proposed that 
the anxiety neurosis syndrome be detached from 
neurasthenia. The symptoms of this syndrome are 
clinically much more closely related to one another than 
to those of genuine neurasthenia; and both the etiology 
and the mechanism of this neurosis are fundamentally 
different from the etiology and mechanism of genuine 
neurasthenia. What Freud calls anxiety neurosis may be 
observed in a completely developed form or in a 
rudimentary one, in isolation or combined with other 
neuroses. The clinical picture of anxiety neurosis 
comprises some of the following symptoms: general 
irritability; anxious expectation; sudden onslaughts of 
anxiety; waking up at night in a fright, vertigo, 
disturbances in digestive activities and attacks of 
paraesthesias. Several of the symptoms that are 
mentioned, which accompany or take the place of an 
anxiety attack, also appear in a chronic form. 

1895B 3/99 

On the grounds for detaching a particular syndrome 
from neurasthenia under the description “anxiety 
neurosis” (1895). Part II. Incidence and aetiology of 
anxiety neurosis. 

In some cases of anxiety neurosis no etiology at all is 
discovered. But where there are grounds for regarding 
the neurosis as an acquired one, careful inquiry directed 
to that end reveals that a set of noxae and influences 
from sexual life are the operative etiological factors. In 
females, disregarding their innate disposition, anxiety 
neurosis occurs in the following cases: as virginal anxiety 
or anxiety in adolescents; as anxiety in the newly 
married; as anxiety in women whose husbands suffer 
from ejaculatio praecox or from markedly impaired 
potency; and whose husbands practice coitus interruptus 
or reservatus; anxiety neurosis also occurs as anxiety in 
widows and intentionally abstinent women; and as 
anxiety in the climacteric during the last major increase 
of sexual need. The sexual determinants of anxiety 

24 



o 



1895F 3/121 



neurosis in men include: anxiety of inten. tonally 
abstinent men, which is frequently combined with 
symptoms of defense; anxiety in men in a state of 
unconsummated excitation, or in those who content 
themselves with touching or looking at women; anxiety 
in men who practice coitus interruptus; and anxiety in 
senescent men. There are 2 other cases which apply to 
both sexes. 1) People who, as a result of practicing 
masturbation, have been neurasthenics, fall victim to 
anxiety neurosis as soon as they give up their form of 
sexual satisfaction. 2) Anxiety neurosis arises as a result 
of the factor of overwork or exhausting exertion. 

1895B 3/106 

On the grounds for detaching a particular syndrome 
from neurasthenia under the description “anxiety 
neurosis” (1895). Part III. First steps towards a theory 
of anxiety neurosis. 

According to Freud, the mechanism of anxiety 
neurosis is to be looked for in a deflection of somatic 
sexual excitation from the psychical sphere, and in a 
consequent abnormal employment of that excitation. 
This concept of the mechanism of anxiety neurosis can 
be made clearer if the following view of the sexual 
process, which applies to men, is accepted. In the 
sexually mature male organism, somatic sexual 
excitation is produced and periodically becomes a 
stimulus to the psyche. The group of sexual ideas which 
is present in the psyche becomes supplied with energy 
and there comes into being the physical state of libidinal 
tension which brings with it an urge to remove that 
tension. A psychical unloading of this kind is possible 
only by means of what is called specific or adequate 
action. Anything other than the adequate action would 
be fruitless, for once the somatic sexual excitation has 
reached threshold value, it is turned continuously into 
psychical excitation and something.must positively take 
place which will free the nerve endings from the pressure 
on them. Neurasthenia develops whenever the adequate 
unloading is replaced by a less adquate one. This view 
depicts the symptoms of anxiety neurosis as being in a 
sense surrogates of the omitted specific action following 
on sexual excitation. In the neurosis, the nervous system 
is reacting against a source of excitation which is 
internal, whereas in the corresponding affect it is 
reacting against an analogous source of excitation which 
is external. 

I895B 3/112 

On the grounds for detaching a particular syndrome 
from neurasthenia under the description “anxiety 
neurosis” (1895). Part IV. Relation toother neuroses. 

The purest cases of anxiety neurosis, usually the most 
marked, are found in sexually potent youthful 



individuals, with an undivided etiology, and an illness 
that is not too long standing. More often, however, 
symptoms of anxiety occur at the same time as, and in 
combination with symptoms of neurasthenia, hysteria, 
obsessions, or melancholia. Wherever a mixed neurosis is 
present, it will be possible to discover an intermixture of 
several specific etiologies. The etiological conditions 
must be distinguished for the onset of the neuroses from 
their specific etiological factors. The former are still 
ambiguous, and each of them can produce different 
neuroses. Only the etiological factors which can be 
picked out in them, such as inadequate disburdening, 
psychical insufficiency or defense accompanied by 
substitution, have an unambiguous and specific relation 
to the etiology of the individual major neuroses. Anxiety 
neurosis presents the most interesting agreement with, 
and differences from, the other major neuroses, in 
particular neurasthenia and hysteria. It shares with 
neurasthenia one main characteristic, namely, that the 
source of excitation lies in the somatic field instead of 
the psychical one as is the case in hysteria and 
obsessional neurosis. The symptomatology of hysteria 
and anxiety neurosis shows many points in common. 
The appearance of the following symptoms either in a 
chronic form or in attacks, the paraesthesias, the 
hyperaesthesias and pressure points are found in both 
hysterias and anxiety attacks. 

3/116 

On the grounds for detaching a particular syndrome 
from neurasthenia under the description “anxiety 
neurosis” (1895). Appendix: The term “Angst” and its 
English translation. 

There are at least 3 instances in which Freud discusses 
the various shades of meaning expressed by the German 
word Angst and the cognate Furcht and Schreck. 
Though he stresses the anticipatory element and absence 
of an object in Angst, the distinctions he draws are not 
entirely convincing, and his actual usage is far from 
invariably obeying them. Angst may be translated to 
many similarly common English words: fear, fright, 
alarm, etc. Angst often appears as a psychiatric term: 
The word universally adopted for the purpose has been 
anxiety. The English translator is driven to compromise: 
he must use anxiety in technical or semitechnical 
connections, and must elsewhere choose whatever 
everyday English word seems most appropriate. 

1895F 3/121 

A reply to criticisms of my paper on anxiety neurosis 
(1895). 

A reply to Lowenfeld’s criticisms of Freud’s paper 
(January 1895) on anxiety neurosis is presented. It is 
Freud’s view that the anxiety appearing in anxiety 



0 

ERIC 



25 

<34 



1896 A 3/141 



neurosis does not admit of a psychical derivation and he 
maintains that fright must result in hysteria or a 
traumatic neurosis, but not in an anxiety neurosis. 
Lowevifeld insists that in a number of cases ‘states of 
anxiety’ appear immediately or shortly after a psychical 
shock. Freud states that in the etiology of the neuroses, 
sexual factors play a predominant part. Lowenfeld 
relates experiences where he has seen anxiety states 
appear and disappear when a change in the subject’s 
sexual life had not taken place but where other factors 
were in play. The following concepts are postulated in 
order to understand the complicated etiological situation 
which prevails in the pathology of the neuroses: 
precondition, specific cause, concurrent causes, and 
precipitating or releasing cause. Whether a neurotic 
illness occurs at all depends upon a quantitative factor, 
upon the total load on the nervous system as compared 
with the latter’s capacity for resistance. What dimensions 
the neurosis attains depends in the first instance on the 
amount of the hereditary taint. What form the neurosis 
assumes is solely determined by the specific etiological 
factor arising from sexual life. 

1896 A 3/141 

Heredity and the aetiology of the neuroses (1896). 

The paper, “Heredity and the Etiology of the 
Neuroses” is a summary of Freud’s contemporary view 
on the etiology of all 4 of what he then regarded as the 
main types of neurosis: the 2 psychoneuroses, hysteria 
and obsessional neurosis; and the 2 actual neuroses, 
neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis. Opinion of the 
etiological role of heredity in nervous illness ought to be 
based on an impartial statistical examination. Certain 
nervous disorders can develop in people who are 
perfectly healthy and whose family is above reproach. In 
nervous pathology, there is similar heredity and also 
dissimilar heredity. Without the existence of a special 
etiological factor, heredity could do nothing. The 
etiological influences, differing among themselves in 
their importance and in the manner in which they are 
related to the effect they produce, can be grouped into 3 
classes: preconditions, concurrent causes, and specific 
causes. In the pathogenesis of the major neuroses, 
heredity fulfills the role of a precondition. Some of the 
concurrent causes of neuroses are: emotional 
disturbance, physical exhaustion, acute illness, 
intoxications, traumatic accidents, etc. The neuroses 
have as their common source the subject’s sexual life, 
whether they lie in a disorder of his contemporary 
sexual life or in important events in his past life. 

1896B 3/162 

Further remarks on the neuro-psychoses of defence 
(1896). Part 1. The “specific” aetiology of hysteria. 

“Further Remarks on the Neuropsychoses of 
Defense” takes up the discussion at a point that Freud 



reached in his first paper, (1894). The ultimate case of 
hysteria is always the seduction of a child by an adult. 
The actual traumatic event always occurs before the age 
of puberty, though the outbreak of the neurosis occurs 
after puberty. This whole position is later abandoned by 
Freud, and its abandonment signalizes a turning point in 
his views. In a short paper published in 1894, Freud 
grouped together nysteria, obsessions, and certain cases 
of acute hallucinatory confusion under the name of 
neuropsychoses of defense because those affections 
turned out to have one aspect in common. This was that 
their symptoms arose through the psychical mechanism 
of defense, that is, in an attempt to repress an 
incompatible idea which had come into distressing 
opposition to the patient’s ego. The symptoms of 
hysteria can only be understood if they are traced back 
to experiences which have a traumatic effect. These 
psychical traumas refer to the patient’s sexual life. These 
sexual traumas must have occurred in early childhood 
and their content must consist of an actual irritation of 
the genitals. All the experiences and excitations which, 
in the period of life after puberty, prepare the way for, 
or precipitate, the outbreak of hysteria, demonstrably 
have their effect only because they arouse the memory 
trace of these traumas in childhood, which do not 
thereupon become conscious but lead to a release of 
affect and to repression. Obsessions also presuppose a 
sexual experience in childhood. 

1896B 3/168 

Further remarks on the neuro-psychosis of defence 
(1896). Part II. The nature and mechanism of 
obsessional neurosis. 

Sexual experiences of early childhood have the same 
significance in the etiology of obsessional neurosis as 
they have in that of hysteria. In all the cases of 
obsessional neurosis, Freud found a substratum of 
hysterical symptoms which could be traced back to a 
scene of sexual passivity that preceded the pleasurable 
action. Obsessional ideas are transformed self-reproaches 
which have reemerged from repression and which relate 
to some sexual act that was performed with pleasure in 
childhood. In the first period, childhood immorality, 
events occur which contain the germ of the later 
neurosis. This period is brought to a close by the advent 
of sexual maturation. Self-reproach now becomes 
attached to the memory of these pleasurable actions. 
The r^cond period, illness, is characterized by the return 
of the repressed memories. There are 2 forms of 
obsessional neurosis, according to whether what forces 
an entrance into consciousness is solely the mnemic 
content of the act involving self-reproach, or whether 
the self-reproachful affect connected with the act does 
so as well. The first form includes the typical obsessional 
ideas, in which the content engages the patient’s 
attention and, he merely feels an indefinite unpleasure, 



as 26 



o 



I898A 3/261 



whereas the only affect which would be suitable to the 
obsessional idea would be one of self-reproach. A second 
form of obsessional neurosis conies about if what has 
forced its way to representation in conscious psychical 
life is not the repressed mnemic content but the 
repressed self-reproach. 

1896B 3/174 

Further remarks on the neuro-psychosis of defense 
(1896). Part III. Analysis of a case of chronic paranoia. 

Freud postulates that paranoia, like hysteria and 
obsessions, proceeds from the repression of distressing 
memories and that its symptoms are determined in their 
form by the content of what has been repressed. The 
analysis of a case of chronic paranoia is presented. Frau 
P., 32 years of age, has been married for 3 years and is 
the mother of a 2-year-old child. Six months after the 
birth of her cliild, she became uncommunicative and 
distrustful, showed aversion to meeting her husband’s 
brothers and sisters and complained that the neighbors 
in the small town in which she lived were rude and 
inconsiderate to her. The patient’s depression began at 
the time of a quarrel between her husband and her 
brother. Her hallucinations were part of the content of 
repressed childhood experiences, symptoms of the 
return of the repressed while the voices originated in the 
repression of thoughts which were self-reproaches about 
experiences that were analogous to her childhood 
trauma. The voices were symptoms of the return of the 
repressed. Part of the symptoms arose from primary 
defense, namely, all the delusional ideas which were 
characterized by distrust and suspicion and which were 
concerned with ideas of being persecuted by others. 
Other symptoms are described as symptoms of the 
return of the repressed. The delusional ideas which have 
arrived in consciousness by means of a compromise 
make demands on the thought activity of the ego until 
they can be accepted without contradiction. 

1896C 3/189 

The aetiology of hysteria (1896). 

“The Etiology of Hysteria” may be regarded as an 
amplified repetition of the first section of its 
predecessor, the second paper on the neuropsychoses of 
defense. No hysterical symptom can arise from a real 
experience alone, but in every case, the memory of 
earlier experiences plays a part in causing the symptoms. 
Whatever case and symptom are taken as out point of 
departure leads to the field of sexual experience. After 
the chains of memories have converged, we come to the 
field of sexuality and to a small number of experiences 
which occur for the most part at the same period of life, 
namely, at puberty. If we press on with the analysis into 
early childhood, we bring the patient to reproduce 
experiences which are regarded as the etiology of his 



neurosis. Freud put forward the thesis that tor every 
case of hysteria there are one or more occurrences of 
premature sexual experience, occurrences which belong 
to the earliest years of childhood but which can be 
reproduced through the work of psychoanalysis in spite 
of the intervening decades. Sexual experiences in 
childhood consisting in stimulation of the genitals must 
be recognized as being the traumas which lead to a 
hysterical reaction to events at puberty and to the 
development of hysterical symptoms. Sensations and 
paraesthesias are the phenomena which correspond to 
the sensory content of the infantile scenes, reproduced 
in a hallucinatory fashion and often painfully 
intensified. 



1897B 3/225 

Abstracts of the scientific writings of Dr. Sigm. Freud, 
1877-1897(1897). 

Freud was appointed a Privatdozent at the Vienna 
University in 1885. Twelve years later, Freud’s name was 
put forward to the Council of the Faculty as Professor 
Extraordinarius. The necessary preliminaries included a 
Curriculum Vitae and a bibliographical abstract of 
publications. Thirteen abstracts of the scientific writings 
of Dr. Sigmund Freud written before, and 26 abstracts 
written after his appointment as Privatdozent are 
presented. 



1898A 3/261 

Sexuality in the aetiology of the neuroses (1896). 

In every case of neurosis there is a sexual etiology; 
but in neurasthenia it is an etiology of a present day 
kind, whereas in the psychoneuroses the factors are of 
an infantile nature. The sexual causes are the ones which 
most readily offer the physician a foothold for his 
therapeutic influence. When heredity is present, it 
enables a strong pathological effect to come about where 
otherwise only a very slight one would have resulted. 
Neurasthenia is one of those affections which anyone 
might easily acquire without having any hereditary taint. 
It is only the sexual etiology which makes it possible for 
us to understand all the details of the clinical history of 
neurasthenics, the mysterious improvements in the 
middle of the course of the illness and the equally 
incomprehensible deteriorations, both of which are 
usually related by doctors and patients to whatever 
treatment has been adopted. Since the manifestations of 
the psychoneuroses arise from the deferred action of 
unconscious psychical traces, they are accessible to 
psychotherapy. The main difficulties which stand in the 
way of the psychoanalytic method of cure are due to the 
lack of understanding among doctors and laymen of the 
nature of the psychoneuroses. 



o 

ERLC 




1898B 3/287 



1898B 3/287 

The psychical mechanism of forgetfulness (1898). 

The phenomenon of forgetfulness, which has been 
universally experienced, usually affects proper names. 
Two accompanying features of forgetfulness are an 
energetic deliberate concentration of attention which 
proves powerless, to find the lost name and in place of 
the name we are looking for, another name promptly 
appears, which we recognize as incorrect and reject, but 
which persists in coming back. The best procedure of 
getting hold of the missing name is not to think of it and 
after a while, the missing name shoots into one’s mind. 
While Freud was vacationing, he went to Herzegovina. 
Conversation centered around the condition of the 2 
countries (Bosnia and Herzegovina), and the character of 
their inhabitants. The discussion turned to Italy and of 
pictures. Freud recommended that his companions visit 
Orvieto some time, in order to see the frescoes there of 
the End of the World and the Last Judgement. Freud 
was unable to think of the artist’s name. He could only 
think of Botticelli and Boltraffio. He had to put up with 
this lapse of memory for several days until he met 
someone who told him that the artist’s name was Luca 
Signorelli. Freud interpreted the forgetting as follows: 
Botticelli contains the same final syllables as Signorelli; 
the name Bosnia showed itself by directing the 
substitution to 2 artists’ names which began with the 
same syllable “Bo”. The place where a piece of news 
about death and sexuality reached Freud was called 
“Trafoi” similar to the second half of the name 
Boltraffio. This example may serve as a model for the 
pathological processes to which the psychical symptoms 
of the psychoneuroses, hysteria, obsessions and 
paranoia, owe their origin. A repressed train of thought 
takes possession in neuroses of an innocent recent 
impression and draws it down with itself into repression. 

1899A 3/301 
Screen memories (1899). 

The age to which the content of the earliest memories 
of childhood is usually referred back is the period 
between the ages of 2 and 4. The most frequent content 
of the first memories of childhood are occasions of fear, 
shame, physical pain, et' ., and important events such as 
illnesses, deaths, fires, births of brothers and sisters, etc. 
A case is presented of a man of university education, 
aged 38, who moved at the age of 3. His memories of his 
first place of residence fall into 3 groups. The first group 
consists of scenes of which his parents have repeatedly 
since described to him. The second group comprises 
scenes which have not been described and some of which 
could not have been described to him. The pictures and 
scenes of the first 2 groups are probably displaced 
memories from which the essential element has for the 



most part been omitted. In the third group, there is 
material, which cannot be understood. Two sets of 
phantasies were projected onto one another and a 
childhood memory was made of them. A screen memory 
is a recollection whose value lies in that it represents in 
the memory impressions and thoughts of a later date 
whose content is connected with its own by symbolic or 
similar links. The concept of screen memory owes its 
value as a memory not to its own content but to the 
relation existing between that content and some other, 
that has been suppressed. Different classes of screen 
memories can be distinguished according to the nature 
of that relation. A screen memory may be described as 
retrogressive. Whenever in a memory the subject himself 
appears as an object among other objects, the contrast 
between the acting and the recollecting ego may be 
taken as evidence that the original impression has been 
worked over. 

1901C 3/323 

Autobiographical note (1901). 

Freud’s autobiographical note, written in the autumn 
of 1899 is presented. He regarded himself as a pupil of 
Brucke and of Charcot. His appointment as Privatdozent 
was in 1885 and he worked as physician and Dozent at 
Vienna University after 1886. Freud produced earlier 
writings on histology and cerebral anatomy, and 
subsequently, clinical works on neuropathology; he 
translated writings by Charcot and Bemheim. Since 
1895, Freud turned to the study of the psychoneuroses 
and especially hysteria, and in a series of shorter works 
he stressed the etiological significance of sexual life for 
the neuroses. He has also developed a new 
psychotherapy of hysteria, on which very little has been 
published. 

VOL. IV The Interpretation of 
Dreams (I) (1900) 

4/xi 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1953). Editor’s intro- 
duction. 

The Interpretation of Dreams is regarded by Freud as 
his most important work. This translation is based on 
the eighth (1930) German edition, the last published 
during Freud’s life. Students of Freud’s theoretical 
writings have been aware that even in his profoundest 
psychological speculations little or no discussion is to be 
found upon some of the most fundamental of the 
concepts of which he makes use: such concepts, for 
instance, as mental energy, sums of excitation, cathexis, 
quantity, quality, intensity, etc. A principal part was 
played in Freud’s scheme by a hypothetical division of 

28 



0 

FRIC 



■V 



37 



!900A 4/22 



the neurons into 3 classes or systems, differentiated 
according to their modes of functioning. Of these the 
first 2 were concerned respectively with external stimuli 
and internal excitations. Both of these operated on a 
purely quantitative basis; with their actions wholly 
determined by the magnitude of the nervous excitations 
impinging on them. The third system was correlated 
with the qualitative differences which distinguish con- 
scious sensations and feelings. Freud asserted that The 
Interpretation of Dreams was finished in all essentials at 
the beginning of 1896. Through the Fliess correspond- 
ence the progress of composition can be followed in 
detail. 

1900A 4/xxi 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Preface to the 
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, eighth editions 
and third (revised) English edition (1900-1931). 

The prefaces to the editions 1 through 6, 8 and the 
third revised English edition are presented. The second 
edition was called for 10 years after the publication of 
the book. The third edition was published 1 year later. 
The theory of dream interpretation has been developed 
further in a direction in which insufficient stress has 
been laid in the first edition of this book. The 
importance of symbolism in dreams was increasingly 
stressed. Dr. Brill’s first translation of The Interpretation 
of Dreams appeared in 1913. This third revised English 
edition with the new contribution to psychology which 
surprised the world when it was published (1900), 
remains essentially unaltered. It contains, even according 
to Freud’s judgment, the most valuable of all his 
discoveries. 

1900A 4/1 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter I: The 
scientific literature dealing with the problems of dreams. 

(A) The relation of dreams to waking life. 

The scientific literature dealing with the problems of 
dreams is discussed. The prescientific view of dreams 
adopted by the peoples of antiquity was in complete 
harmony with their view of the universe in general, 
which led them to project into the external world as 
though they were realities, things which in fact enjoyed 
reality only within their own minds. The unsophisticated 
waking judgment of someone who has just awakened 
from sleep assumes that his dreams, even if they did not 
themselves come from another world, had carried him 
off into another world. Two views of the relation of 
dreams to waking life are discussed: 1) that the mind is 
cut off in dreams, almost without memory, from the 
ordinary content and affairs of waking life or 2) that 
dreams carry on waking life and attach themselves to the 
ideas previously residing in consciousness. Due to the 
contradiction between these 2 views, a discussion of the 



subject is presented by Hildebrandt ' rito believes that it 
is impossible to describe the characteristics of dreams at 
all except by means of a series c i (3) contrasts which 
seem to sharpen into contradictic is. It is concluded that 
the dream experience appears as- jmething alien inserted 
between 2 sections of life w tich are perfectly con- 
tinuous and consistent with each other. 

1900A 4/11 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter I: The 
scientific literature dealing with the problems of dreams. 

(B) The material of dreams-Memory in dreams. 

All the material making up the content of a dream is 
in some way derived from experience. Dreams have at 
their command memories which are inaccessible in 
waking life. It is a very common event for a dream to 
give evidence of knowledge and memories which the 
waking subject is unaware of possessing. One of the 
sources from which dreams derive materials for repro- 
duction, material which is in part neither remembered 
nor used in the activities of waking thought, is childhood 
experience. A number of writers assert that elements are 
to be found in most dreams, which are derived from the 
last very few days before they were dreamt. The most 
striking and least comprehensible characteristic of 
memory in dreams is shown in the choice of material 
reproduced: what is found worth remembering is not, as 
in waking life, only what is most important, but what is 
most indifferent and insignificant. This preference for 
indifferent, and consequently unnoticed, elements in 
waking experience is bound to lead people to overlook 
the dependence of dreams upon waking life and to make 
it difficult in any particular instance to prove that 
dependence. The way memory behaves in dreams is of 
the greatest importance for any theory of memory in 
general. 

1900A 4/22 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter I: The 
scientific literature dealing with the problems of dreams. 

(C) The stimuli and sources of dreams. 

There are 4 kinds of sources of dreams: external 
(objective) sensory excitations; .nternal (subjective) 
sensory excitations; internal (organic) somatic stimuli; 
and purely psychical sources of stimulation. There are a 
great number of sensory stimuli that reach us during 
sleep, ranging from unavoidable ones which the state of 
sleep itself necessarily involves or must tolerate, to the 
accidental, rousing stimuli which may or do put an end 
to sleep. As sources of dream images, subjective sensory 
excitations have the advantage of not being dependent, 
like objective ones, upon external chance. The body, 
when in a diseased state , becomes a source of stimuli for 
dreams. In most dreams, somatic stimuli and the 
psychical instigators work in cooperation. 



1900A 4/43 



1900A 4/43 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter I: The 
scientific literature dealing with the problems of dreams. 

(D) Why dreams are forgotten after waking. 

It is a proverbial fact that dreams melt away in the 
morning. All the causes that lead to forgetting in waking 
life are operative for dreams as well. Many dream images 
are forgotten because they are too weak, while stronger 
images adjacent to them are remembered. It is in general 
as difficult and unusual to retain what is nonsensical as it 
is to retain what is confused and disordered. Dreams, in 
most cases, are lacking in intelligibility and orderliness. 
The compositions which constitute dreams are barren of 
the qualities (strength intensity, nonunique experience, 
orderly groupings) which would make it possible to 
remember them, and they are forgotten because as a rule 
they fall to pieces a moment after awakening, and 
because most people take very little interest in their 
dreams. 



1900A 4/48 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter I: The 
scientific literature dealing with the problems of dreams. 

(E) The distinguishing psychological characteristics of 
dreams. 

It is assumed that dreams are products of our own 
mental activity. One of the principal peculiarities of 
dream life makes its appearance during the very process 
of falling asleep and may be described as a phenomenon 
heralding sleep. Dreams think predominantly in visual 
images, but make use of auditory images as well. In 
dreams, the subjective activity of our minds appears in 
an objective form, for our perceptive faculties regard the 
products of our imagination as though they were sense 
impressions. Sleep signifies an end of the authority of 
the self, hence, falling asleep brings a certain degree of 
passivity along with it. The literature that involves the 
psychological characteristics of dreams shows a very 
wide range of variation in the value which it assigns to 
dreams as psychical products. This range extends from 
the deepest disparagement through hints at a yet 
undisclosed worth, to an overvaluation which ranks 
dreams far higher than any of the functions of waking 
life. 



1900A 4/63 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter I: The 
scientific literature dealing with the problems of dreams. 

(F) Ihe moral sense in dreams. 

The moral sense in dreams is discussed. Some assert 
that the dictates of morality have no place in dreams, 



while others maintain that the moral character of man 
persists in his dream life. Those who maintain that the 
moral personality of man ceases to operate in dreams 
should, in strict logic, lose all interest in immoral 
dreams. Those who believe that morality extends to 
dreams are careful to avoid assuming complete responsi- 
bility for their dreams. The emergence of impulses which 
are foreign to our moral consciousness is merely analo- 
gous to the fact that dreams ltave access to ideational 
material which is absent in our waking state or plays but 
a small part in it. Affects in dreams cannot be judged in 
the same way as the remainder of their content; and we 
are faced by the problem of what part of the psychical 
processes occurring in dreams is to be regarded as real 
(has a claim to be classed among the psychical processes 
of waking life). 



1900A 4/75 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter I: The 
scientific literature in dealing with the problems of 
dreams. (G) Theories of dreaming and its function. 

Theories of dreaming and its function are discussed. 
Some theories (i.e. Delboeuf) states that the whole of 
psychical activity continues in drtam. The mind does 
not sleep and its apparatus remains intact; but, since it 
falls under the conditions of the state of sleep, its 
normal functioning necessarily produces different results 
during sleep. There are other theories which presuppose 
that dreams imply a lowering of psychical activity, a 
loosening of connections, and an impoverishment of the 
material accessible. These theories must imply the 
attribution to sleep of characteristics quite different 
from those suggested by Delboeuf. A third group of 
theories ascribe to the dreaming mind a capacity and 
inclination for carrying out special psychical activities of 
which it is largely or totally incapable in waking life. The 
putting of these faculties into force usually provides 
dreaming with a utilitarian function. The explanation of 
dreaming by Schemer as a special activity of the mind, 
capable of free expansion only during the state of sleep 
is presented. He states that the material with which 
dream imagination accomplishes its artistic work is 
principally provided by the organic somatic stimuli 
which are obscure during the daytime. 



1900A 4/88 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter I: The 
scientific literature dealing with the problems of dreams. 
(H) The relations between dreams and mental diseases. 

When we speak of the relation of dreams to mental 
disorders we may have 3 things in mind: 1) etiological 
and clinical connections, as when a dream represents a 



o 

ERIC 



39 



30 



1900A 4/134 



psychotic state, or introduces it, or is left over from it; 
2) modifications to which dream life is subject in cases 
of mental disease; and 3) intrinsic connections between 
dreams and psychoses, analogies pointing to their being 
essentially akin. In addition to the psychology of dreams 
physicians will some day turn their attention to psycho- 
pathology of dreams. In cases of recovery from mental 
diseases it can often be observed that while functioning 
is normal during the day, dream life is still under the 
influence of the psychosis. The indisputable analogy 
between dreams and insanity is one of the most 
powerful factors of the medical theory of dream life 
which regards dreaming as a useless and disturbing 
process and as the expression of a reduced activity of the 
mind. 

1900A 4/96 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter II: The 
method of interpreting dreams: An analysis of a speci- 
men dream. 

The method of interpreting dreams is presented. The 
aim that Freud sets is to show that dreams are capable of 
being interpreted. The lay world has hitherto made use 
of 2 essentially different methods: 1) It considers the 
content of the dream as a whole and seeks to replace it 
by another content which is intelligible and in certain 
respects analogous to the original one, this is (symbolic 
dream interpreting). 2) The decoding method, which 
treats dreams as a kind of cryptography in which each 
sign can be translated into another sign having a known 
meaning, in accordance with a fixed key. Neither of the 
2 popular procedures for interpreting dreams can be 
employed for a scientific treatment of the subject. The 
object of the attention is not the dream as a whole but 
the separate portions of its content. 

1900A 4/106 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter II: The 
method of interpreting dreams: An analysis of a speci- 
men dream (preamble and dream). 

An analysis of one of Freud’s dreams, the dream of 
July twenty-third to the twenty-fourth, 1895, is pre- 
sented. During the summer of 1895, Freud had been 
giving psychoanalytic treatment to a woman who was on 
very friendly terms with him and his family. This woman 
was involved in the dream as a central figure (Irma). The 
dream was analyzed, one line or thought at a time. The 
dream fulfilled certain wishes which were initiated by 
the events of the previous evening. The conclusion of the 
dream was that Freud was not responsible for the 
persistence of Irma’s pains, but that Otto (a junior 
colleague) was. Otto had annoyed Freud by his remarks 
about Irma’s incomplete cure, and the dream gave Freud 
his revenge by throwing the reproach back. Certain other 
themes played a part in the dream, which were not so 



obviously connected with his exculpation from Irma’s 
illness: his daughter’s illness and that of his patient who 
bore the same name, the injurious effect of cocaine, the 
disorder of his patient who was traveling in Egypt, his 
concern about his wife’s health and about that of his 
brother and of Dr. M., his own physical ailments, and his 
anxiety about his absent friend who suffered from 
suppurative rhinitis. Freud concluded that when the 
work of interpretation is completed, it is perceived that 
a dream is the fulfillment of a wish. 

1900A 4/122 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter III: A 
dream is the fulfillment of a wish. 

It is easy to prove that dreams often reveal themselves 
as fulfillments of wishes. In a dream of convenience, 
dreaming has taken the place of action, as it often does 
elsewhere in life-. Dreams which can only be understood 
as fulfillments of wishes and which bear their meaning 
upon their faces without disguise are found under the 
most frequent and various conditions. They are mostly 
short and simple dreams, which afford a pleasant contrast 
to the confused and exuberant compositions that have in 
the main attracted the attention of the authorities. The 
dreams of young children are frequently pure wish 
fulfillments and are subsequently quite uninteresting 
compared with the dreams of adults. A number of cases 
of dreams of children are presented and interpreted. 

1900A 4/134 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter IV: Dis- 
tortion in dreams. 

The fact that the phenomena of censorship and of 
dream distortion correspond to their smallest details 
justifies assumption that they are similarly determined, 
therefore, it is supposed that dreams are given their 
shape in individual human beings by the operation of 2 
psychical forces; and that one of these forces constructs 
the wish which is expressed by the dream, while the 
other exercises a censorship upon this dream wish and, 
by the use of that censorship, forcibly brings about a 
distortion in the expression of the wish. The very 
frequent dreams, which appear to stand in contradiction 
to Freud’s theory because their subject matter is the 
frustration of a wish or the occurrence of something 
clearly unwished for, may be brought together under the 
heading of counter wish dreams. If these dreams are 
considered as a whole, it seems possible to trace them 
back to 2 principles. One of the 2 motive forces is the 
wish that Freud may be wrong, the second motive 
involves the masochistic component in the sexual 
constitution of many people. Those who find their 
pleasure, not in having physical pain inflicted on them, 
but in humiliation and mental torture, may be described 
as mental masochists. People of this kind can have 



31 

40 



0 



1900 A 4/163 



counter wish dreams and unpleasurable dreams, which 
are none the less wish fulfillments since they satisfy their 
masochistic inclinations. Anxiety dreams (a special 
subspecies of dreams with a distressing content) do not 
present a new aspect of the dream problem but present 
the question of neurotic anxiety. The anxiety that is felt 
in a dream is only apparently explained by the dream’s 
content. In cases of both phobias and anxiety dreams 
the anxiety is only superficially attached to the idea that 
accompanies it; it originates from another source. Since 
neurotic anxiety is derived from sexual life and corre- 
sponds to libido which has been diverted from its 
purpose and has found no employment, it can be 
inferred that anxiety dreams are dreams with a sexual 
content, the libido belonging to that which has been 
transformed into anxiety. 



1900A 4/163 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter V: The 
material and sources of dreams. (A) Recent and indif- 
ferent material in dreams. 

Recent and indifferent material and sources of 
dreams are discussed. Dreams show a clear preference for 
the impressions of the immediately preceding days and 
make their selection upon different principles from our 
waking memory, since they do not recall what is 
essential and important but what is subsidiary and 
unnoticed. Dreams have at their disposal the earliest 
impressions of childhood and details from that period of 
life which is trivial and which in the waking state are 
believed to have been long forgotten. In each of Freud’s 
dreams, it is possible to find a point of contact with the 
experiences of the previous day. The instigating agent of 
every dream is to be found among the experiences which 
one has not yet slept on. Dreams can select their 
material from any part of the dreamer’s life, provided 
that there is a train of thought linking the experience of 
the dream day with the earlier ones. The analysis of a 
dream will regularly reveal its true, psychically signifi- 
cant source in waking life, though the emphasis has been 
displaced from the recollection of that source on to that 
of an indifferent one. The source of a dream may be 
either: 1) a recent and psychically significant experience, 

2) several recent and significant experiences combined 
into 1 unit by the dream, 3) 1 or more recent and 
significant experiences represented in the dream content 
by a mention of a contemporary but indifferent experi- 
ence or 4) an internal significant experience which is 
invariably represented in the dream by mention of a 
contemporary but indifferent impression. Considering 
these 4 cases, a psychical element which is significant 
but not recent can be replaced by an element which is 
recent but indifferent provided 1) the dream content is 
connected with a recent experience, and 2) the dream 
instigator remains a psychically significant process. 

41 32 



Freud concludes that there are no indifferent dream 
instigators, therefore, no innocent dreams. 



1900A 4/189 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter V: The 
material and sources of dreams. (B) Infantile material as 
a source of dreams. 

Infantile material is discussed as a source of dreams. 
Experiences from childhood play a part in dreams whose 
content would never have led one to suppose it. In the 
case of another group of dreams, analysis shows that the 
actual wish which instigated the dream, and the ful- 
fillment of which is represented by the dream, is derived 
from childhood, so that we find the child and the child’s 
impulses still living on in the dream. The deeper one 
carries the analysis of a dream, the more often one 
comes upon the track of experiences in childhood which 
have played a part among the sources of that dream’s 
latent content. Trains of thought reaching back to 
earliest childhood lead off even from dreams which seem 
at first sight to have been completely interpreted, since 
their sources and instigating wish have been discovered 
without difficulty. Dreams frequently seem to have 
more than one meaning. Not only may they include 
several wish fulfillments, one alongside the other, but a 
succession of meanings or wish fulfillments may be 
superimposed on one another, the bottom one being the 
fulfillment of a wish dating from earliest childhood. 



1900A 4/221 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter V: The 
material and sources of dreams. (C) The somatic sources 
of dreams. 

The somatic sources of dreams a e discussed. There 
are 3 different kinds of somatic sources of stimulation: 
objective sensory stimuli arising from external objects, 
internal states of excitation of the sense organs having 
only a subjective basis, and somatic stimuli derived from 
the interior of the body. The significance of objective 
excitations of the sense organs is established from 
numerous observations and has been experimentally 
confirmed. The part played by subjective sensory excita- 
tions is demonstrated by the recurrence in dreams of 
hypnagogic sensory images. Though it is impossible to 
prove that the images and ideas occurring in dreams can 
be traced to internal somatic stimuli, this origin finds 
support in the universally recognized influence exercised 
upon dreams by states of excitation in digestive, urinary, 
and sexual organs. When external nervous stimuli and 
internal somatic stimuli are intense enough to force 
psychical attention to themselves, they then serve as a 
fixed point for the formation of a dream, a nucleus in its 
material; a wish fulfillment is then desired that shall 



o 



1900 A 4/273 



correspond to this nucleus. Somatic sources of stimu- 
lation during sleep, unless they are of unusual intensity, 
play a similar part in the formation of dreams to that 
played by recent but indifferent impressions remaining 
from the previous day. 

1900A 4/242 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter V: The 
materia] and sources of dreams. (D) Typical dreams: 
(a) Embarassing dreams of being naked. 

There are a certain number of typical dreams which 
almost everyone has dreamt and which we assume must 
have the same meaning for everyone. Dreams of being 
naked or insufficiently dressed in the presence of 
strangers sometimes occur with the additional feature of 
their being a complete absence of any such feeling of 
shame on the dreamer’s part. Freud is concerned only 
with those dreams of being naked in which one does feel 
shame and embarassment and tries to escape or hide, and 
is then overcome by a strange inhibition which prevents 
one from moving and makes one feel incapable of 
altering the distressing situation. The nature of the 
undress involved is customarily far from clear. The 
people in whose presence one feels ashamed are almost 
always strangers, with their features left indeterminate. 
The core of a dream of exhibiting lies in the figure of the 
dreamer himself (not as he was as a child but as he 
appears at the present time) and his inadequate clothing 
(which emerges indistinctly, whether owing to super- 
imposed layers of innumerable later memories of being 
in undress or as a result of the censorship). Repression 
plays a part in dreams of exhibiting; for the distress felt 
in such dreams is i reaction against the content of the 
scene of exhibiting Having found expression in spite of 
the ban upon it. 

1900A 4/248 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter V: The 
material and sources of dreams. (D) Typical dreams: (b) 
Dreams of the death of persons of whom the dreamer is 
fond. 

There is a group of dreams which contains the death 
of some loved relative; for instance, of a parent, of a 
brother or sister, or of a child. Two classes of such 
dreams are distinguished: those in which the dreamer is 
unaffected by grief, so that on awakening he is aston- 
ished at his lack of feeling, and those in which the 
dreamer feels deeply pained by the death and may even 
weep bitterly in his sleep. Analyses of the dreams of 
class 1 show that they have some meaning other than the 
apparent one, and that they are intended to conceal 
some other wish. The meaning of the second class of 
dreams, as their content indicates, is a wish that the 
person in question may die. A child’s death wishes 
against his brothers and sisters arc explained by the 
childish egoism which makes him regard them as his 



rivals. Dreams of the death of parents apply with 
preponderant frequency to the parent who is of the 
same sex as the dreamer. It is as though a sexual 
preference were making itself felt at an early age: as 
though boys regarded their fathers and girls their 
mothers as their rivals in love, whose elimination could 
not fail to be to their advantage. 

1900A 4/271 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter V: The 
material and sources of dreams. (D) Typical dreams: 
(c) Other typical dreams. 

Since Freud has no experience of his own regarding 
other typical dreams in which the dreamer finds himself 
flying through the air to the accompaniment of agree- 
able feelings or falling with feeling$*df anxiety, he uses 
information provided by psychoanalysis to conclude 
that these dreams reproduce impressions of childhood 
and they relate to games involving movement, which are 
extraordinarily attractive to children. What provokes 
dreams of flying and falling is not the state of the tactile 
feelings during sleep or sensations of the movement of 
lungs: These sensations are themselves reproduced as 
part of the memory to which the dream goes back: 
rather, they are part of the content of the dream and not 
its source. All the tactile and motor sensations which 
occur in these typical dreams are called up immediately 
when there is any psychical reason for making use of 
them and they can be disregarded when no such need 
arises. The relation of these dreams to infantile experi- 
ences has been established due to indications from the 
analyses of psychoneurotics. 

1900A 4/273 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter V: The 
material and sources of dreams. (D) Typical dreams: (d) 
Examination dreams. 

Everyone who has passed the matriculation exami- 
nation at the end of his school studies complains of the 
obstinacy with which he is pursued by anxiety dreams of 
having failed, or of being obliged to take the examina- 
tion again, etc. In the case of those who have obtained a 
University degree this typical dream is replaced by 
another one which represents them as having failed in 
the University finals; and it is in vain that they object, 
even while still asleep, that for a year they have been 
practicing medicine or working as University lecturers or 
heads of offices. The examination anxiety of neurotics 
owes its intensification to childhood fears. Anxious 
examination dreams search for some occasion in the past 
in which great anxiety has turned out to be unjustified 
and has been contradicted by the event. This situation 
would be a striking instance of the content of a dream 
being misunderstood by the waking agency (the 
dreamer). 



33 



© 

EMC 



42 



19CDA 4/279 



1900A 4/279 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VI; The 
dream-work: (A) The work of condensation. 

Every attempt that has hitherto been made to solve 
the problem of dreams has dealt directly with their 
manifest content as it is presented in memory. The 
dream thoughts and the dream content are presented 
like 2 versions of the same subject matter in 2 different 
languages. The dream content seems like a transcript of 
dream thoughts into another mode of expression, whose 
characters are syntactic laws are discovered by compar- 
ing the original and the translation. The dream thoughts 
are immediately comprehensible, as soon as we have 
learned them. The dream content is expressed as it were 
in a pictographic script, the characters of which have to 
be transposed individually into the language of the 
dream thoughts. The first thing that becomes clear to 
anyone who compares the dream content with the 
dream thoughts is that a work of condensation on a large 
scale has been carried out. Dreams are brief, meager, and 
laconic in comparison with the range and wealth of the 
dream thoughts. The work of condensation in dreams is 
seen at its clearest when it handles words and names. 
The verbal malformations in dreams greatly resemble 
those which are familiar in paranoia but which are also 
present in hysteria and obsessions. When spoken sen- 
tences occur in dreams and are expressly distinguished as 
such from thoughts, it is an invariable rule that the 
words spoken in the dream are derived from spoken 
words remembered in the dream material. 



1900A 4/305 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VI: The 
dream-work. (B) The work of displacement. 

The dream is differently centered from the dream 
thoughts; its content has different elements as its central 
point. It seems plausible to suppose that in dream work 
a psychical force is operating which strips the elements 
which have a high psychical value of their intensity and, 
by means of overdetermination, creates from elements 
of low psychical value new values, which afterwards find 
their way into the dream content. If that is so, a 
transference and displacement of psychical intensities 
occurs in the process of dream formation, and it is as a 
result of these that the difference between the test of 
the dream content and that of the dream thoughts come 
about. We may assume that dream displacement comes 
about through the influence of the censorship of 
endopsychic defense. Those elements of the dream 
thoughts which make their way into the dream must 
escape the censorship imposed by resistance. 



1900A 4/310 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VI: The 
dream-work. (C) The means of representation in dreams. 

The means of representation in dreams are discussed. 
In the process of transforming the latent thoughts into 
the manifest content of a dream, 2 factors are at work: 
dream condensation and dream displacement. The 
logical relation between the dream thoughts are not 
given any separate representation in dreams. If a 
contradiction occurs in a dream, it is either a contradic- 
tion of the dream itself or a contradiction derived from 
the subject matter of one of the dream thoughts. Dreams 
take into account the connection which undeniably 
exists between all the portions of the dream thoughts by 
combining the whole material into a single situation or 
event. Similarity, consonance, and the possession of 
common attributes are all represented in dreams by 
unification which may either by already present in the 
material of the dream thoughts or may be freshly 
constructed. Identification or the construction of com- 
posite figures serves various purposes in dreams: firstly 
to represent an element common to 2 persons, secondly 
to represent a displaced common element, and thirdly, 
to express a merely wishful common element. The 
content of all dreams that occur during the same night 
forms part of the same whole; the fact of their being 
divided into several sections, as well as the groupings and 
number of those sections has a meaning and may be 
regarded as a piece of information arising from the latent 
dream thoughts. 



VOL. V The Interpretation of Dreams (II) and 
On Dreams (1900-1901) 



1900A 5/339 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VI: The 
dream-work. (D) Considerations of representability. 

The material of the dream thoughts, stripped to a 
large extent of its interrelations, is submitted to a proc- 
ess of compression, while at the same time displacements 
of intensity between its elements necessarily bring about 
a psychical transvaluation of the material. There are 2 
sorts of displacements. One consists in the replacing of a 
particular idea by another in some way clorely associ- 
ated with it, and they are used to facilitate condensation 
in so far as, instead of 2 elements, a single common 
element intermediate between them finds its way into 
the dream. Another displacement exists and reveals itself 
in a change in verbal expression of the thoughts con- 
cerned. The direction taken by the displacement usually 
results in the exchange of a colorless and abstract ex- 
pression in dream thought for a pictorial and concrete 
one. Of the various subsidiary thoughts attached to the 



34 



43 



1900 A 5/426 



essential dream thoughts, those which admit of visual 
representations will be preferred. The dream work does 
not shrink from the effort of recasting unadaptable 
thoughts into a new verbal form, provided that that 
process facilitates representation and so relieves the 
psychological pressure caused by constricted thinking. 

1900A 5/350 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VI: The 
dream-work. (E) Representation by symbols in dreams— 
Some further typical dreams. 

Since symbolism is used for representing sexual mate- 
rial in dreams, the question arises whether many of these 
symbols do not occur with a permanently fixed mean- 
ing. This symbolism is not peculiar to dreams, but is 
characteristic of unconscious ideation, in particular 
among the people (laymen). It is to be found in folklore, 
in popular myths, legends, linguistic idioms, proverbial 
wisdom and current jokes, to a more complete extent 
than in dreams. The following ideas or objects show 
dream representation by symbols: a hat as a symbol of a 
man or of male genitals; a little hat as the genital organ; 
being run over as a symbol of sexual intercourse; the 
genitals represented by buildings, stairs, and shafts; the 
male organ represented by persons and the female organ 
by a landscape. The more one is concerned with the 
solution of dreams, the more one is driven to recognize 
that the majority of the dreams of adults deal with sex- 
ual material and give expression to erotic wishes. Many 
dreams, if they are carefully interpreted, are bisexual, 
since they unquestionably admit of an over interpre- 
tation in which the dreamer’s homosexual impulses are 
realized, impulses which are contrary to his normal sex- 
ual activities. A large number of dreams, often accom- 
panied by anxiety and having as their content such 
subjects as passing through narrow spaces or being in 
water, are based upon phantasies of intrauterine life, of 
existence in the womb, and of the act of birth. 

1900A 5/405 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VI: The 
dream-work. (F) Some examples. Calculations and 
speeches in dreams. 

A few instances of peculiar or unusual modes of rep- 
resentation in dreams are presented. For the purpose of 
representation in dreams, the spelling of words is far less 
important than their sound. The dream work makes use, 
for the purpose of giving a visual representation of the 
dream thoughts, of any methods within its reach, 
whether waking criticism regards them as legitimate or 
illegitimate. The dream work can often succeed in repre- 
senting very refractory material, such as proper names, 
by a farfetched use of out-of-the-way associations. The 



dream work does not in fact carry out any calculations 
at all, whether correctly or incorrectly; it merely throws 
into the form of a calculation numbers which are present 
in the dream thoughts and can serve as allusions to 
matter that cannot be represented in any other way. The 
dream work treats numbers as a medium for the ex- 
pression of its purpose in precisely the same way as it 
treats any other idea, including proper names and 
speeches that occur recognizably as verbal presentations. 
The dream work cannot actually create speeches. How- 
ever much speeches and conversations, whether reason- 
able or unreasonable in themselves, may figure in 
dreams, analysis invariably proves that all that the dream 
has done is to extract from the dream thoughts frag- 
ments of speeches which have really been made or heard. 



1900A 5/426 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VI: The 
dream-work. (G) Absurd dreams-Intellectual activity in 
dreams. 

Absurdity in dreams is discussed. The frequency with 
which dead people appear in dreams and act and asso- 
ciate with us as though they were alive has produced 
some remarkable explanations which emphasize our lack 
of understanding of dreams. Often we think, what would 
that particular person do, think or say if he were alive. 
Dreams are unable to express an if of any kind except by 
representing the person concerned as present in some 
particular situation. Dreams of dead people whom the 
dreamer has loved raise problems in dream interpretation 
and these cannot always be satisfactorily solved due to 
the strongly marked emotional ambivalence which 
dominates the dreamer’s relation to the dead person. A 
dream is made absurd if a judgment that something is 
absurd is among the elements included in the dream 
thoughts. Absurdity is accordingly one of the methods 
by which the dream work represents a contradiction, 
besides such other methods as the reversal in the dream 
content of some material relation in the dream thoughts, 
or the exploitation of the sensation of motor inhibition. 
Everything that appears in dreams as the ostensible activ- 
ity of the function of judgment is to be regarded, not as 
an intellectual achievement of the dream work, but as 
belonging to the material of the dream thought and as 
having been lifted from them into the manifest content 
of the dream as a readymade structure. Even the judg- 
ments, made after waking, upon a dream that has been 
remembered, and the feelings called up by the reproduc- 
tion of such a dream form part of the latent content of 
the dream and are to be included in its interpretation. 
An act of judgment in a dream is only a repetition of 
some prototype in the dream thoughts. 




35 



1900 A 5/460 



1900A 5/460 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VI: The 
dream -work. (H) Affects in dreams. 

In dreams, the ideational content is not accompanied 
by the affective consequences that should be regarded as 
inevitable in waking thought. In the case of a psychical 
complex which has come under the influence of the cen- 
sorship imposed by resistance, the affects are least influ- 
enced and can indicate how we should derive the missing 
thoughts. In some dreams the affect remains in contact 
with the ideational material which has replaced that to 
which the affect was originally attached, in others, the 
dissolution of the complex has proceeded further. The 
affect makes its appearance completely detached from 
the idea which belongs to it and is introduced at some 
other point in the dream, where it fits in with the new 
arrangement of the dream elements. If an important con- 
clusion is drawn in the dream thoughts, the dream also 
contains a conclusion, but this latter conclusion maybe 
displaced on to quite different material. Such a displace- 
ment not infrequently follows the principle of antithesis. 
The dream work can also turn the affects in the dream 
thoughts into their opposite. A dominating element in a 
sleeper’s mind may be constituted by a tendency to 
some affect and tliis may then have a determining influ- 
ence upon his dreams. A mood of this kind may arise 
from his experiences or thoughts during the preceding 
day, or its sources may be somatic. In either case it will 
be accompanied by trains of thought appropriate to it. 

1900 A 5/488 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VI: The 
dream-work. (1) Secondary revision. 

A majority of the critical feelings in dreams are not in 
fact directed against the content of the dream, but are 
portions of the dream thoughts which have been taken 
over and used to an appropriate end. The censoring 
agency is responsible for interpolations and additions 
(secondary revisions) in the dream content. The inter- 
polations are less easily retained in the memory than 
genuine derivatives of the material of the dream 
thoughts; if the dream is to be forgotten they are the 
first part of it to disappear. Daytime phantasies share a 
large number of their properties with night dreams. Like 
dreams, they are wish fulfillments; like dreams, they are 
based to a great extent on impressions of infantile exper- 
iences; like dreams, they benefit by a certain degree of 
relaxation of censorship. Dream work makes use of a 
ready made phantasy instead of putting one together out 
of the material of the dream thoughts. The psychical 
function which carries out what is described as the sec- 
ondary revision of the content of dreams is identified 
with the activity of our waking thought. Our waking 
(preconscious) thinking behaves towards any perceptual 
material with which it meets in just the same way as 



secondary revision behaves towards the content of 
dreams. Secondary revision is the one significant factor 
in the dream work which has been observed by the 
majority of writer; on the subject. 

1900A 5/509 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VII: The 
psychology of the dream-processes. (A) The forgetting of 
dreams. 

The psychology of forgetting dreams is discussed. 
What we remember of a dream and what we exercise our 
interpretative arts upon has been mutilated by the un- 
trustworthiness of our memory, which seems incapable 
of retaining a dream and may well have lost precisely the 
most important parts of its content. Our memory of 
dreams is not only fragmentary but positively inaccurate 
and falsified. The most trivial elements of a dream are 
indispensable to its interpretation and the work in hand 
is held up if attention is not paid to these elements until 
too late. The forgetting of dreams remains inexplicable 
unless the power of the psychical censorship is taken 
into account. The forgetting of dreams is tendentious 
and serves the purpose of resistance. Waking life shows 
an unmistakable inclination to forget any dream that has 
been formed in the course of the night, whether as a 
whole, directly after waking, or bit by bit in the course 
of the day. The agent chiefly responsible for this for- 
getting is the mental resistance to the dream which has 
already done what it could against it during the night. 
We need not suppose that every association that occurs 
during the work of interpretation has a place in the 
dream work during the night. 

1900A 5/533 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VII: The 
psychology of the dream processes. (B) Regression. 

The path leading through the preconscious to con- 
sciousness is barred to the dream thoughts during the 
daytime by the censorship imposed by resistance, but 
during the night they are able to obtain access to con- 
sciousness. In hallucinatory dreams, the excitation 
moves in a backward direction, instead of being trans- 
mitted towards the motor system it moves towards the 
sensory system and finally reaches the perceptual sys- 
tem. If we describe as ‘progressive’ the direction taken 
by psychical processes arising from the unconscious dur- 
ing waking life, then dreams are spoken of as having a 
regressive character. We call it regression when in a 
dream an idea is turned back into the sensory image 
from which it was originally derived. Regression is an 
effect of a resistance opposing the progress of a thought 
into consciousness along the normal path, and of a 
simultaneous attraction exercised upon the thought by 
the presence of memories possessing great sensory force. 
In the case of dreams, regression may perhaps be further 



0 

ERJC 




36 



1900 A 5/588 



facilitated by the cessation of the progressive current 
which streams in during the daytime from the sense or- 
gans; in other forms of regression, the absence of this 
accessory factor must be made up for by a greater inten- 
sity of other motives for regression. There are 3 kinds of 
regression: topographical regression, temporal regression, 
and formal regression. 

1900A S/SSO 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VII: The 
psychology of the dream processes. (C) Wish-fulfillment. 

Dreams are fulfillments of wishes. There are some 
dreams which appear openly as wish fulfillments, and 
others in which the wish fulfillment is unrecognizable 
and often disguised. Undistorted wishful dreams are 
found principally in ch'ldren; however, short, frankly 
wishful dreams seem to occur in adults as well. There are 
3 possible origins for the wish. 1) It may have been 
aroused during the day and for external reasons may not 
have been satisfied. 2) It may have arisen during the day 
but been repudiated. 3) It may have no connection with 
daytime life and be one of those wishes which only 
emerge from the suppressed part of the mind and be- 
come active at night. Children’s dreams show that a wish 
that has not been dealt with during the day can act as a 
dream instigator. A conscious wish can only become a 
dream instigator if it succeeds in awakening an uncon- 
scious wish with the same tenor and in obtaining rein- 
forcement from it. Dreaming is a piece of infantile 
mental life that has been superseded. Wishful impulses 
left over from conscious waking life must be relegated to 
a secondary position in respect to the formation of 
dreams. The unconscious wishful impulses try to make 
themselves effective in daytime as well, and the fact of 
transference, as well as the psychoses, show us that they 
endeavor to force their way by way of the preconscious 
system into consciousness and to obtain control of the 
power of movement. It can be asserted that a hysterical 
symptom develops only where the fulfilments of 2 op- 
posing wishes, arising each from a different psychical 
system, are able to converge in a single expression. 



1900A 5/573 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VII: The 
psychology of the dream processes. (D) Arousal by 
dreams-The function of dreams-Anxiety -dreams. 

The function of dreams is discussed. The state of 
sleep makes the sensory surface of consciousness which 
is directed toward the preconscious far more insus- 
ceptible to excitation than the surface directed towards 
the perceptual systems. Interest on the thought proc- 
esses during sleep is abandoned while unconscious wishes 
always remain active. There are 2 possible outcomes for 
any particular unconscious excitatory process: Either it 



may be left to itself, in which case it eventually forces its 
way through consciousness and finds discharge for its 
excitation in movement ; or it may come under the influ- 
ence of the preconscious, and its excitation , instead of 
being discharged, may be bound by the preconscious. 
This second alternative occurs in the process of dream- 
ing. The cathexis from the preconscious which goes half- 
way to meet the dream after it has become perceptual 
binds the dream’s unconscious excitation and makes it 
powerless to act as a disturbance. The theory of anxiety 
dreams forms part of the psychology of the neuroses. 
Since neurotic anxiety arises from sexual sources Freud 
analyses a number of anxiety dreams in order to indicate 
the sexual material present in their dream thoughts. 



1900A 5/588 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VII: The 
psychology of the dream processes. (E) The primary and 
secondary processes-Repression. 

The view that dreams carry on the occupations and 
interest of waking life has been confirmed by the dis- 
covery of concealed dream thoughts. The theory of 
dreams regards wishes originating in infancy as the indis- 
pensable motive force for the formation of dreams. A 
dream takes the place of a number of thoughts which are 
derived from our daily life and which form a completely 
logical sequence. Two fundamentally different kinds of 
psychical processes are concerned in the formation of 
dreams: One of these produces perfectly rational dream 
thoughts, of no less validity than normal thinking; while 
the other treats these thoughts in a manner which is 
bewildering and irrational. A normal train of thought is 
only submitted to abnormal psychical treatment if an 
unconscious wish, derived from infancy and in a state of 
repression, has been transferred on to it. As a result of 
the unpleasure principle, the first psychical system is 
totally incapable of bringing anything disagreeable into 
the context of its thoughts. It is unable to do anything 
but wish. The second system can only cathect an idea if 
it is in a position to inhibit any development of un- 
pleasure that may proceed from it. Anything that could 
evade that inhibition would be inaccessible to the second 
system as well as to the first ; for it would promptly be 
dropped in obedience to the unpleasure principle. De- 
scribed is the psychical process of which the first system 
alone admits as the primary process, and the process 
which results from the inhibition imposed by the second 
system as the secondary process. The second system is 
obliged to correct the primary process. Among the wish- 
ful impulses derived from infancy there are some whose 
fulfillment would be a contradiction of the purposive 
ideas of secondary thinking. The fulfillment of these 
wishes would no longer generate an affect of pleasure 
but of unpleasure; and it is this transformation of affect 



37 



46 



1900 A 5/610 

which constitutes the essence of ‘repression.’ It is con- 
cluded that what is suppress'' continues to exist in nor- 
mal people as well as abnormal. *nd remains capable of 
psychical functioning. 

1900 A 5/610 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Chapter VII: The 
psychology of the dream processes. (F) The unconscious 
and consciousness-Reality. 

The unconscious is the true psychical reality; in its 
innermost nature it is as much unknown to us as the 
reality of the external world, and it is as incompletely 
presented by the data of consciousness as is the external 
world by the communications of our sense organs. A 
dream is recognized as a form of expression of impulses 
which are under the pressure of resistance during the day 
but which have been able to find reinforcement during 
the night from deep-lying sources of excitation. The 
theoretical value of the study of dreams is looked for in 
the contributions it makes to psychological knowledge 
and in the light it throws on the problems of psycho- 
neuroses. 



1941C 5/623 

The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Appendix A: A 
premonitory dream fulfilled. Appendix B: List of writ- 
ings by Freud dealing predominantly or largely with 
dreams. 

A case of a premonitory dream fulfilled is discussed. 
Frau B. told Freud that she dreamt that she had met Dr. 
K., a friend and former family doctor of hers, in front of 
Hiess’s shop. The next morning, while she was walking 
along the same street, she in fact met the person in 
question at the very spot she had dreamt of. There was 
no evidence of her having had any recollection at all of 
the dream on the morning after she dreamt it, until after 
her walk. The dream was interpreted in terms of Frau 
B.’s previous life. It was concluded that she did not ac- 
tually dream this dream the preceding night but that the 
dream was created after the event. The creation of a 
dream after the event, which alone makes prophetic 
dreams possible, is nothing other than a form of censor- 
ing, thanks to which the dream is able to make its way 
through into consciousness. An appendix is included 
which lists (in chronological order) the writings by 
Freud dealing predominantly with dreams. 

1901A 5/631 

On Dreams (1901). Parts I and II. 

During the prescientific epoch, men had no difficulty 
in finding an explanation of dreams. When they remem- 
bered a dream after waking up, they regarded it as either 



a favorable or a hostile manifestation by higher powers, 
demonic and divine. Since the rejection of the mytholog- 
ical hypothesis, however, dreams have needed explan- 
ation. The majority of medical writers adopt a view ac- 
cording to which dreams scarcely reach the level of being 
psychical phenomena at all, stating that the sole instiga- 
tors of dreams are the sensory and somatic stimuli which 
either impinge upon the sleeper from outside or become 
accidentally active in his internal organs. Freud believes 
that we obtain material that enables us to resolve any 
pathological idea if we turn our attention to those asso- 
ciations which are involuntary, which interfere with our 
reflection, and which are normally dismissed by our crit- 
ical faculty as worthless rubbish. If we make use of this 
proceduic upon ourselves, we can best assist the investi- 
gation of the dream by at once writing down what are at 
first unintelligible associations. The dream is regarded as 
a sort of substitute for the thought processes, full of 
meaning and emotion. The content of the dream is very 
much shorter than the thoughts for which it is regarded 
as a substitute. 



1901A 5/642 

On Dreams (1901). Parts III and IV. 

The transformation of the latent dream thoughts into 
the manifest dream content is the first instance of 
psychical material being changed from a mode of expres- 
sion which is immediately intelligible to another which 
we can only come to understand with the help of guid- 
ance and effort, though it must be recognized as a func- 
tion of our mental activity. Dreams can be divided into 3 
categories in respect to the relation between their latent 
and manifest content. We may distinguish those dreams 
which make sense, are intelligible, and can be inserted 
without further difficulty into the context of our mental 
life. A second group is formed by those dreams which, 
though connected in themselves have a bewildering 
effect because we cannot see how to fit that sense into 
our mental life. Group 3 contains those dreams which 
are without either sense or intelligibility, which seem 
disconnected, confused, and meaningless. There is an in- 
timate and regular relation between the unintelligible 
and confused nature of dreams and the difficulty of re- 
porting the thoughts behind them. It is supposed that a 
transformation of some kind occurs even in confused 
dreams. The material in the dream thoughts which is 
packed together for the purpose of constructing a dream 
situation must in itself be adaptable for the purpose of 
condensation. There must be one or more common ele- 
ments in all the components. It is thought that conden- 
sation, together with the transformation of thoughts 
into situations, is the most important and peculiar char- 
acteristic of the dream work. A formula is given for 
condensation in dreams. 



1901 A 5/678 



1901 A 5/654 

On Dreams (1901). Parts V and VI. 

In the case of the complicated and confused dreams, 
condensation and dramatization are not enough to ac- 
count for the dissimilarity between the content of the 
dream and the dream thoughts. Through analysis, we 
have arrived at a knowledge of the dream thoughts, thus 
observing that the manifest dream content deals with 
quite different material from the latent thoughts. In the 
course of the dream work, the psychical intensity passes 
over from the thoughts and ideas to which it properly 
belongs on to others which have no claim to any such 
emphasis. If what make their way into the content of 
dreams are impressions and material which are indiffer- 
ent and trivial rather than justifiably stirring and inter- 
esting, that is only the effect of the process of displace- 
ment. Keeping in mind insights gained from replacing 
the manifest by the latent content of dreams it can be 
concluded that dreams are never concerned with things 
which we should not think it worth while to be con- 
cerned with during thejday, and trivialities which do not 
affect us during the day are unable to pursue us in our 
sleep. The process of displacement is chiefly responsible 
for our being unable to discover or recognize the dream 
thoughts in the dream content, unless we understand the 
reason for their distortion. The manifest content of 
dreams consists mostly in pictorial situations; and the 
dream thoughts must accordingly be submitted to a 
treatment which will make them suitable for a represen- 
tation of this kind. The psychical material of the dream 
thoughts habitually includes recollections of impressive 
experiences which are thus themselves perceived as situ- 
ations having a visual subject matter. Dream content, 
however, does not consist entirely of situations, but also 
includes disconnected fragments of visual images, 
speeches and even bits of unmodified thoughts. Dreams 
take into account the connection which exists between 
all the portions of the dream thoughts by combining the 
whole material into a single situation. They reproduce 
logical connection by approximation in time and space. 



1901A 5/666 

On Dreams (1901). Parts VII, VIII, IX and X. 

Considerations of intelligibility lead to the final re- 
vision of a dream and this reveals the origin of the activ- 
ity. It behaves towards the dream content lying before it 
just as our normal psychical activity behaves in general 
towards any perceptual content that may be presented 
to it. Dreams which have undergone a revision at the 
hands of a psychical activity completely analogous to 
waking thought may be described as well constructed. 



Dream work is not creative. It develops no phantasies of 
its own; it makes no judgments and dreams no conclu- 
sions. A conclusion drawn in a dream is nothing other 
than the repetition of a conclusion in the dream 
thoughts. If the conclui. m is taken over into the dream 
unmodified, it will appear impeccable; if the dream work 
has displaced it on to some other material, it will appear 
nonsensical. Displacement is the most striking of the 
special achievements of the dream work. The essential 
determining condition of displacement is a purely 
psychological one: something in the nature of a motive. 
Dreams which are intelligible and have a meaning are 
undisguised wish fulfillments. In the case of obscure and 
confused dreams, the dream situation represents a wish 
as fulfilled; however, the wish in such cases is either 
itself a repressed one and alien to consciousness, or it is 
intimately connected with repressed thoughts and is 
based upon them. The fundamental pattern for the gen- 
eration of dreams is: repression, relaxation of the censor- 
ship, and the formation of a compromise. 



1901 A 5/678 

On Dreams (1901). Parts XI, XII and XIII. 

Dreams are regarded as the guardians of sleep. A 
psychical agency exists which exercises a dominating and 
inhibiting influence upon mental impulses and maintains 
that influence with severity, and which, owing to its 
relation to consciousness and to voluntary movement, 
contains the strongest instruments of psychical power. A 
portion of the impulses of childhood has been sup- 
pressed by this agency as being useless to life, and any 
thought material derived from those impulses is in a 
state of repression. While this agency, in which we recog- 
nize our normal ego, is concentrated on the wish to 
sleep, it it compelled by the psychophysiological con- 
ditions of sleep to relax the energy which it uses to 
repress material during the day. The dream provides a 
kind of psychical consummation for the wish that has 
been suppressed by representing it as fulfilled; while it 
also allows sleep to continue. The function of the dream 
as a guardian of sleep becomes particularly evident when 
an external stimulus impinges upon the senses of a 
sleeper. Most dreams of adults are traced back by anal- 
ysis to erotic wishes. The majority of dream symbols 
serve to represent persons, parts of the body and activ- 
ities invested with erotic interest; in particular the gen- 
itals are represented by a number of often very sur- 
prising symbols and the greatest variety of objects are 
employed to denote them symbolically. It is the task of 
dream interpretation to replace the dream by the latent 
dream thoughts, thus to unravel what the dream work 
has woven. 



39 



O 



455-582 0 - 72 -4 



48 



1901 B 6/ix 



VOL. VI The Psychopathology of Everyday 
Life (1901) 



1901 B 6/ix 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Editor’s 
introduction (1960). 

Only one other of Freud’s works, the Introductory 
Lectures (1916 to 1917) rivals The Psychopathology of 
Everyday Life in the number of German editions it has 
passed through and the number of foreign languages into 
which it has been translated. In The Psychopathology of 
Everyday Life almost the whole of the basic explana- 
tions and theories were already present in the earliest 
editions; the great mess of what was added later 
consisted merely in extra examples and illustrations to 
amplify what he had already discussed. Freud first 
mentioned parapraxis in a letter to Fliess of August 26, 
1898. The special affection with which Freud regarded 
parapraxes was no doubt due to the fact that they, along 
with dreams, were what enabled him to extend to 
normal mental life the discoveries he had first made in 
connection with neuroses. 



1901 B 6/1 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
1 : The forgetting of proper names. 

There are certain characteristics of the forgetting of 
proper names which can be recognized clearly in 
individual cases. These are cases in which a name is in 
fact not only forgotten, but wrongly remembered. In the 
course of our efforts to recover the name that has 
dropped out, substitute names enter our consciousness; 
we recognize them at once as incorrect, but they keep 
on returning and force themselves upon us with great 
persistence. The process that should lead to the repro- 
duction of the missing name has been displaced and 
therefore has led to an incorrect substitute. Freud’s 
hypothesis is that this displacement is not left to 
arbitrary psychical choice but follows paths which can 
be predicted and which conform to laws. The name or 
names which are substituted are connected in a discover- 
able way with the missing name . The conditions neces- 
sary for forgetting a name, when forgetting it is 
accompanied by paramnesia, may be summarized as 
follows: 1) a certain disposition for forgetting the name, 
2) a process of suppression carried out shortly before, 
and 3) the possibility of establishing an external associ- 
ation between the name in question and the element 
previously suppressed. 



1901 B 6/8 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
1 1 : The forgetting of foreign words. 

The current vocabulary of our own language, when it 
is confined to the range of normal usage, seems to be 
protected against being forgotten. With the vocabulary 
of a foreign language it is notoriously otherwise and the 
disposition to forget it extends to all parts of speech. An 
early stage in functional disturbance is revealed by the 
fluctuations in the control we have over our stock of 
foreign words, according to the general condition of our 
health and to the degree of our tiredness. The forgetting 
of a nonsubstantial word in a Latin quotation is 
presented. The appearance or nonappearance in the 
memory of incorrect substitutes cannot be made the 
basis for any radical distinction. The disturbance in 
reproduction in the example presented occurred from 
the very nature of the topic in the quotation, since 
opposition unconsciously arose to the wishful idea 
expressed in it. 



1901 B 6/15 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
III: The forgetting of names and sets of words. 

The forgetting of names and sets of words is 
discussed. The forgotten or distorted matter is brought 
by some associative path into connection with an 
unconscious thought content, a thought content which 
is the source of the effect manifested in the form of 
forgetting. There are various reasons why names and sets 
of words are forgotten. Some of them are: professional 
complex, family complex, personal reference, sub- 
limated grudge against the bearer of it, guilty con- 
science, and personal complex. In a large number of 
cases, a name is forgotten not because the name itself 
arouses such motives, but because, owing to similarity in 
sound and to assonance, it touches upon another name 
against which these motives do operate. The mechanism 
of names being forgotten consists in the interference 
with the intended reproduction of the name by an alien 
train of thought which is not at the time conscious. 
Between the name interfered with and the interfering 
complex either a connection exists from the outset, or 
else such a connection has established itself, often in 
ways that appear artificial. Among the interfering 
complexes, those of personal reference prove to have the 
greatest effect. In general, 2 main types of name 
forgetting may be distinguished: those cases where the 
name itself touches on something unplasant, and those 
where it is brought into connection with another name 
which has that effect. 



o 

ERLC 




W 



1901 B 6/134 



1901 B 6/43 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
IV: Childhood memories and screen memories. 

A person’s earliest childhood memories seem fre- 
quently to have preserved what is indifferent and 
unimportant, whereas no trace is found in an adult’s 
memory of impressions dating from that time which are 
important, impressive and rich in affect. There is a 
similarity between the forgetting of proper names 
accompanied by paramnesia, and the formation of 
screen memories. Of the childhood memories that have 
been retained a few strike us as perfectly understand- 
able, while others seem odd or unintelligible. It is not 
difficult to correct certain errors regarding both sorts. If 
the memories that a person has retained are subjected to 
an analytic enquiry, it is easy to establish that there is no 
guarantee of their accuracy. Some of the mnemic images 
are falsified, incomplete, or displaced in time and place. 
Remembering in adults makes use of a variety of psychical 
material but all dreams are predominantly of visual 
images only. This development is reversed in childhood 
memories; they are plastically visual even in people 
whose later function of memory has to do without any 
visual element. Thus visual memory preserves the type of 
infantile memory. It is suspected that in the so called 
earliest childhood memories we possess not the genuine 
memory trace but a later revision of it, a revision which 
may have been subjected to the influences of a variety of 
later psychical forces. Thus the childhood memories of 
individuals acquire the significance of screen memories. 

1901 B 6/53 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
V: Slips of the tongue. 

The slips of the tongue that are Observed in normal 
people give an impression of being the preliminary stages 
of the so-called paraphasias that appear under path- 
ological conditions. Among the slips of the tongue that 
Freud collected only a very few can be solely attributed 
to the contact effects of sounds. He almost invariably 
discovers a disturbing influence which comes from 
something outside the intended utterance; and the 
disturbing element is either a single thought that has 
remained unconscious, which manifests itself in the slip 
of the tongue and which often can be brought to 
consciousness only by means of searching analysis, or it 
is a more general psychical motive force which is 
directed against the entire utterance. Slips of the tongue 
are contagious. A slip of the tongue has a cheering effect 
during psychoanalytic work, when it serves as a means of 
providing the therapist with a confirmation that may be 
very welcome to him if he is engaged in a dispute with 
the patient. People give slips of the tongue and other 
parapraxes the same interpretation that Freud advocates 
even if they do noi theoretically endorse his view and 



even if they are disinclined, so far as it applies to 
themselves, to renounce the convenience that goes along 
with tolerating parapraxes. 

1901 B 6/106 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
VI: Misreadings and slips of the pen. (A). Misreadings. 

Misreadings and slips of the pen are discussed. When 
we come to mistakes in reading and writing, we find that 
our general approach and our observations in regard to 
mistakes in speaking hold here also. Some examples of 
misreadings are presented, carefully analyzed and the 
misreadings found to be due to some of the following 
causes: questions of priority; long standing habits; the 
reader’s preparedness; the reader’s profession or present 
situation; something which rouses the reader’s defenses; 
and personal motives. 

1901 B 6/116 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
VI: Misreadings and slips of the pen (B). Slips of the 
pen. 

Slips of the pen are made more readily than slips of 
the tongue for the following reason: In the course of 
normal speaking the inhibitory function of the will is 
continuously directed to bringing the course of ideas and 
the articulatory movements into harmony with each 
other. If the expressive movement which follows the 
ideas is retarded (as in writing) such anticipations make 
their appearance easily. Twenty-one examples of slips of 
the pen are presented, analyzed and thought due to 
some of the following causes: the expression of a wish; 
unconscious hostility; similar subject matter; making a 
joke; and secondary revision. These examples have not 
justified assumption that there is a quantitative lessening 
of attention, but rather, a disturbance of attention by an 
alien thought which claims consideration. Between slips 
of the pen and forgetting may be inserted the situation 
where someone forgets to append a signature. An 
unsigned check has the same significance as a forgotten 
check. 

1901 B 6/134 

•The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
VII: The forgetting of impressions and intentions. (A). 
The forgetting of impressions and knowledge. 

The forgetting of impressions is discussed. No psy- 
chological theory can give a connected account, of the 
fundamental phenomenon of remembering and for- 
getting. We assume that forgetting is a spontaneous 
process which may be regarded as requiring a certain 
length of time. Some examples of forgetting, most of 
which Freud observed in himself, are presented. Freud 
distinguishes the forgetting of impressions and ex- 
periences from the forgetting of intentions. He states the 



41 



0 

ERIC 



50 



1901 B 6/151 



invariable result of the entire series of observations: in 
every case the forgetting turned out to be based on a 
motive of unpleasure. Mislaying something is really the 
same as forgetting where it has been put. There are 
abundant signs to be found in healthy nonneurotic 
people that the recollection of distressing impressions 
and the occurrence of distressing thoughts are opposed 
by a resistance. The architectonic principle of the mental 
apparatus lies in a stratification, a building up of 
superimposed agencies. It is quite possible that this 
defensive endeavor belongs to a lower psychical agency 
and is inhibited by higher agencies. In a very similar way 
to the forgetting of names, the forgetting of impressions 
can be accompanied by faulty recollection; and this, 
where it finds credence, is described as paramnesia. 



1901B 6/151 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
VII: The forgetting of impressions and intentions. (B). 
The forgetting of intentions. 

No group of phenomena is better qualified than the 
forgetting of intentions for demonstrating the thesis 
that, in itself, lack of attention does not suffice to 
explain parapraxes. An intention is an impulse to per- 
form an action: an impulse which has already found 
approval but whose execution is postponed to a suitable 
occasion. There are 2 situations in life in which even the 
layman is aware that forgetting cannot in any way claim 
to be considered as an elementary phenomenon not 
further reducible, but entitles him to conclude that there 
are such things as unavowed motives: love relationships 
are military disciplines. But the service of women and 
military service demand that everything connected with 
them should be immune to forgetting. Freud made a 
collection of the cases of omitting to do something as a 
result of forgetting which he observed in himself. He 
found that they could be traced to interference by un- 
known and unavowed motives; or, to a counter-will. 
Where intentions of some importance are concerned we 
have found in general that they are forgotten when 
obscure motives rise against them. In the case of rather 
less important intentions we can recognize a second 
mechanism of forgetting: a counter-will is transferred to 
the intention from some other topic, after an external 
association has been formed between the other topic 
and the content of the intention. 



was intended, seems to be the essential element. The 
others, in which it is rather the whole action that seems 
to be inappropriate, Freud calls symptomatic and chance 
actions No sharp line can be drawn between them, and 
we aro forced to conclude that all the divisions made in 
this scudy have no significance other than a descriptive 
one and run counter to the inner unity in this field of 
phenomena. Included in the category of bungled actions 
are also those actions which result in breakage or self- 
injury. 



1901B 6/191 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
IX: Symptomatic and chance actions. 

Chance actions differ from ‘bungled’ actions because 
they do not have the support of a conscious intention, 
are in no need of a pretext and appear on their own 
account. We perform them without thinking there is 
anything in them, quite accidentally, just to have some- 
thing to do; and such information will put an end to any 
enquiry into the significance of the action. These 
actions, which cannot be excused on grounds of clumsi- 
ness have to fulfill certain conditions: they must be un- 
obtrusive and their effects must be slight. Symptomatic 
acts is a better name for these actions than chance 
actions. They give expression to something which the 
agent himself does not suspect in them, and which he 
does not as a rule intend to impart to other people but 
to keep to himself. The richest supply of such chance or 
symptomatic acts is obtained during psychoanalytic 
treatment of neurotics. An example is given of how 
there can be a close connection between a symbolic 
action performed through force of habit and the most 
intimate and important aspects of a healthy person’s life. 
Chance actions and symptomatic acts occurring in matri- 
monial matters (often of serious significance) are dis- 
cussed along with the human habit of ‘losing things,’ 
with examples given of each. Following these is a brief 
and varied collection of symptomatic acts found in 
healthy and neurotic people. The images and turns of 
phrase to which a person is particularly given are rarely 
without significance when one is forming a judgment of 
him; and others often turn out to be allusions to a theme 
which is being kept in the background at the time, but 
which has powerfully affected the speaker. 



190113 6/162 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
VIII: Bungled actions. 

The term ‘bungled actions’ is used to describe all the 
cases in which a wrong result, i.e . , a deviation from what 



1901B 6/217 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
X: Errors. 

Errors of memory are distinguished from forgetting 
accompanied by paramnesia by the single feature that in 
the former the error (the paramnesia) is not recognized 



42 



o 

ERJC 



51 



1901 B 6/269 



as such but finds credence. Of all parapraxes errors seem 
to have the least rigid mecnamsm. The occurrence ot an 
error is a quite general indication that the mental 
activity in question has had to struggle with a disturbing 
influence; but the particular form that the error takes is 
not determined by the quality of the concealed dis- 
turbing idea. Every time we make a skip in talking or 
writing we may infer that there has been a disturbance 
due to mental processes lying outside our intention; but 
it must be admitted that slips of the tongue and of the 
pen often obey the laws of resemblance, of indolence or 
of the tendency to haste, without the disturbing element 
succeeding in imposing any part of its own character on 
the resulting mistake in speech or writing. Seventeen 
examples of errors are reported. 



1901 B 6/230 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
XI: Combined parapraxes. 

Combined parapraxes are discussed and examples 
given. Mislaying, breaking, and forgetting were inter- 
preted as an expression of a counterwill that has been 
pushed back. Repeated forgetfulness resulted in an 
eventually bungled performance. A change in the form 
taken by the parapraxis while outcome remains the same 
gives a vivid impression of a will striving for a definite 
aim, and contradicts the notion that a parapraxis is a 
matter of chance and needs no interpretation. It was 
found that a conscious intention completely failed to 
prevent the success of the parapraxis. 



rather, that it is strictly determined by certain circum- 
stances, memories, etc. Many people contest the as- 
sumption of complete psychical determinism by appeal- 
ing to a special feeling of conviction that there is a free 
will. It is not necessary to dispute the right to the feeling 
of conviction of having a free will. If the distinction 
between conscious and unconscious motivation is taken 
into account, our feeling of conviction informs us that 
conscious motivation does not extend to all our motor 
decisions. 



1901 B 6/254 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
XII: Determinism, belief in chance and superstition - 
Some points of view. (C) and (D). 

There are 2 spheres in which it is possible to demon- 
strate phenomena that appear to correspond to an un- 
conscious, and therefore displaced, knowledge of that 
motivation. A striking and generally observed feature of 
the behavior of paranoics is that they attach the greatest 
significance to the minor details of other people’s 
behavior which we ordinarily neglect, interpret them and 
make them the basis of far reaching conclusions. 
Another indication that we possess unconscious and 
displaced knowledge of the motivation in chance actions 
and parapraxes is to be found in the phenomenon of 
superstition. Superstition is in large part the expectation 
of trouble. We must also include in the category of the 
miraculous and the uncanny the peculiar feelings we 
have, in certain moments and situations, of having once 
before been in the same place, though our efforts never 
succeed in clearly remembering the previous occasion. 



1901 B 6/239 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
XII: Determinism, belief in chance and superstition - 
Some points of view. (A) and (B). 

Certain shortcomings in our psychical functioning 
and certain seemingly unintentional performances are 
proven by analysis to have valid motives and to be deter- 
mined by motives unknown to consciousness. In order 
to be included in a class of phenomena explicable in this 
way, a psychical parapraxis must fulfill the following 
conditions: 1) it must not exceed certain dimensions 
fixed by our judgment, 2) it must be in the nature of a 
momentary and temporary disturbance; and 3) if we 
perceive the parapraxis at all, we must not be aware in 
ourselves of any motive for it. If we agree that a part of 
our psychical functioning cannot be explained by pur- 
posive ideas, we are failing to appreciate the extent of 
determination in mental life. A number of examples 
indicate that one cannot make a number occur to one at 
one’s own free arbitrary choice any more than a name, 



1901 B 6/269 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Chapter 
XII: Determinism, belief in chance and superstition - 
Some points of view. (E), (F)and (G). 

Every time Freud analyzed forgetting, a connection 
was clearly shown to exist between the forgetting of a 
name and a reason for the forgetting. It is not possible to 
interpret every dream but a dream which proves refrac- 
tory during an attempt to solve it the next day will be 
more vulnerable to analysis a week or a month later, 
after a change has come about and has reduced the con- 
tending psychical values. The same applies to the solving 
of parapraxes and symptomatic acts. Parapraxes have a 
hidden motivation. The basic determinants of the 
normal process of forgetting are unknown while the 
motive for forgetting (in cases that require a special ex- 
planation) is invariably an unwillingness to remember 
something which can evoke distressing feelings. In the 



43 



0 

ERJC 



52 



6/291 



forgetting of intentions another factor emerges. The con- 
flict, which could only be surmised in the repression of 
what was distressing to remember, here becomes 
tangible, and in the analysis of the examples a counter 
will can regularly be recognized which opposes the inter- 
tion without putting an end to it. Consequently, 2 types 
of psychical process are recognized: either the counter- 
will is turned directly against the intention or it is un- 
related in its nature to the intention itself and establishes 
its connection with it by means of an external associa- 
tion. The same conflict governs ‘bungled’ actions while 
in chance or symptomatic actions and internal conflict 
becomes less and less important. The mechanism of 
parapraxes and chance actions correspond in its most 
essential points with the mechanism of dream formation. 
In both cases we find condensations and compromise 
formations. It is concluded that both severe and mild 
psychopathology (and also in parapraxes and chance 
actions) have 1 factor in common: the phenomena can 
be traced back to incompletely suppressed psychical 
material, which, although pushed away by conscious- 
ness, has nevertheless not been robbed of all capacity for 
expressing itself. 



6/291 

The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901). Index of 
parapraxes. 

An index of parapraxes is presented. The parapraxes 
are grouped as follows: bungled actions; errors; for- 
getting impressions and intentions; forgetting names and 
words; lost and mislaid objects; misreadings ; slips of the 
pen and misprints; slips of the tcngue; and symptomatic 
and chance actions. The list does not entirely follow 
Freud’s grouping of parapraxes according to the titles of 
the various chapters. Items have been classified under 
the most appropriate headings, regardless of where ihev 
appear in the book. The source of each parapraxis is 
given where it is other than Freud himself. 



VOL. VII A Case of Hysteria, Three Essays 
on Sexuality and Other Works (1901 — 1905) 

1905E 7/3 

Fragment of an analysis of a case of hysteria: (1953) 
Editor’s note. 

The Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria 
was published in October and November, 1905; how- 
ever, the greater part of it was written in January 1901. 
On October 14, 1900, Freud told Fliess that he hadre- 
cently begun work with a new patient, an 18-year-old 

44 



girl. Her treatment came to an end some 3 months later. 
The analysis was grouped around 2 dreams and con- 
tained solutions of hysterial symptoms and considera- 
tions on the sexual organic basis of the whole condition. 
Three times in his later writings, Freud assigned his treat- 
ment of Dora to the wrong year, to 1899 instead of 
1900. Dora was born in 1882, her father was ill in 1888, 
bed wetting appeared in 1889 and dyspnea in 1890. Her 
father’s detached retina occurred in 1892 and in 1894, 
her father had his confusional attack and visited Freud. 
April 1902 was Dora’s last visit to Freud. 



1905E 7/7 

Fragment of an analysis of a case of hysteria (1905). 
Prefatory remarks. 

Prefatory remarks to a Fragment of an Analysis of a 
Case of Hysteria are presented. If it is true that the 
causes of hysterical disorders are to be found in the 
intimacies of the patients’ psychosexual life, and that 
hysterical symptoms are the expression of their most 
secret and repressed wishes, then the complete elucida- 
tion of a case of hysteria involves the revelation of those 
intimacies and the betrayal of those secrets. Freud be- 
lieves it is the physician’s duty to publish what he be- 
lieves he knows of the causes and structure of hysteria, 
and it becomes cowardice to neglect doing so, as long as 
he can avoid causing direct personal injury to the patient 
concerned. Some ways in which Freud overcame some 
of the technical difficulties in drawing up the report of 
this case history are presented. The material which elu- 
cidated the case was grouped around 2 dreams and the 
treatment covered only 3 months and was not carried 
through to its appointed end, but was broken off at the 
patient’s request when it reached a certain point. 



1905E 7/15 

Fragment of an analysis of a case of hysteria (1905). 
Chapter I: The clinical picture. 

The family of the 18-year-old girl (Dora), who is the 
patient, included her parents and a brother who was VA 
years her senior. Her father was the dominating figure in 
the family, owing to his intelligence and character as 
much as to the circumstances of his life. His daughter 
was very tenderly attached to him, and for that reason 
her critical powers, which developed early, took all the 
more offense at many of his actions and peculiarities. 
Her affection for him was further increased by the many 
severe illnesses which he had since her sixth year. The 
patient had begun to develop neurotic symptoms at the 
age of 8 and became subject at that time to chronic 
dyspnea with occasional episodes in which .the symptom 



o 



53 



I 



was very much aggravated. Freud first saw her when she 
was 16 at which time she was suffering from a cough and 
from hoarseness. The experience with Herr K., his mak- 
ing love to her and the insult to her honor which was 
involved seem to provide the psychical trauma which 
Breuer and Freud declared to be the indispensable pre- 
requisite for the production of a hysterical disorder. 
Thus there are 3 symptoms, disgust, sensation of pres- 
sure on the upper part of the body, and the avoidance of 
men engaged in affectionate conversation, all derived 
from this single experience. Next considered were her 
motives for being ill. The relation between Dora and her 
father, Herr K. and Frau K. and the relation between 
Dora’s father and Frau K. were the primary contributors 
to Dora’s hysteria. It was concluded that no one can 
undertake the treatment of a case of hysteria until he is 
convinced of the impossibility of avoiding the mention 
of sexual subjects, or unless he is prepared to allow 
himself to be convinced by experience. 

1905E 7/64 

Fragment of an analysis of a case of hysteria (1905). 
Chapter II: The first dream. 

Dora’s first dream which keeps recurring is presented: 
“A house was on fire.” My father was standing beside 
iny bed and woke me up. I dressed quickly. Mother 
wanted to stop and save her jewel case; but Father said, 
‘I refuse to let myself and 2 children be burnt for the 
sake of your jewel case.’ We hurried downstairs, and as 
soon as I was outside I woke up.” Freud’s task was to 
establish the relation between the events at L. (the place 
where the scene with Herr K. had taken place) and the 
recurrent dreams which she had had there. Jewel case 
was interpreted as a means of expressing the female geni- 
tals. The dream interpreted as an intention which Dora 
carried with her into her sleep was repeated each night 
until the intention had been carried out; and it reap- 
peared years later when an occasion arose for forming an 
analogous intention. The intention might have been 
consciously expressed in words as these: “I must fly 
from this house, for I see that my virginity is threatened 
here; I shall go away with my father, and I shall take 
precautions not to be surprised while I am dressing in 
the morning.” The dream was a reaction to a fresh ex- 
perience of an exciting nature; and this experience must 
have revived the memory of the only previous experi- 
ence which was at all analogous to it. The latter was the 
scene of the kiss in Herr K.’s place of business, when she 
had been seized with disgust. 

1905E 7/94 

Fragment of an analysis of a case of hysteria (1905). 
Chapter III: The second dream. 

A few weeks after the first dream, a second dream 
occurred. Dora was wandering abou. alone in a strange 
town, and saw streets and squares. Vhe wandering about 



1905D 7/125 

was overdetermined and led back to one of the exciting 
causes from the day before. Dora returned to her own 
house and found a note from her mother saying that 
since she had left home without her parents’ knowledge, 
the mother had not wanted to write and say her father 
was ill. Now he was dead, and Dora could come if she 
liked. This was interpreted as revenge against her father. 
The fact that she asked a certain question, “Where is 
the station?” nearly a hundred times in her dream led to 
another cause of the dream which was related to the 
previous evening. The thick wood near the station in her 
dream was interpreted as a symbolic geography of sex. 
There lay concealed behind the first situation in the 
dream a phantasy of defloration, the phantasy of a man 
seeking to force an entrance into the female genitals. It 
was concluded that incapacity for meeting a real erotic 
demand is one of the most essential features of a neu- 
rosis and that neurotics are dominated by the opposition 
between reality and phantasy. If what they long for 
most intensely in their phantasies is presented to them in 
reality, they flee from it; and they abandon themselves 
to their phantasies most readily where they need no 
longer fear to see them realized. 

1905E 7/112 

Fragment of an analysis of a case of hysteria (1905). 
Chapter IV: Postscript. 

The theory of hysteria does not by any means fail to 
point out that neuroses have an organic basis, though it 
does not look for that basis in any pathological ana- 
tomical changes, and provisionally substitutes the con- 
ception of organic functions for the chemical changes 
which we should expect to find but which we are at 
present unable to apprehend. Sexuality does not simply 
intervene on one single occasion, at some point in the 
working of the processes which characterize hysteria, 
but it provides the motive power for every single 
symptom, and for every single manifestation of a 
symptom. The symptoms of the disease are nothing else 
than the patient’s sexual activity. During psychoanalytic 
treatment, the formation of new symptoms is invariably 
stopped. But the productive powers of the neurosis are 
by no means extinguished; they are occupied in the cre- 
ation of a special class of mental structures, for the 
most part unconscious, to which the name of transfer- 
ence may be given. Transferences are new editions or 
facsimiles of the impulses and phantasies which are 
aroused and made conscious during the progress of the 
analysis; however, they replace some earlier person by 
the person of the physician. 

1905D 7/125 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality: Editor’s note 
(1953) and prefaces (1909-1920). 

Freud’s Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality 
stand beside his Interpretation of Dreams as his most 



o 

ERJC 



45 

54 



t 



190SD 7/136 

momentous and original contributions to psychoanalytic 
knowledge. The history of Freud’s concern with the sub- 
ject can be followed in detail. Clinical observations of 
the importance of sexual factors in the causation, first, 
of anxiety neurosis and neurasthenia, and later, of the 
psychoneuroses, were what first led Freud into a general 
investigation of the subject of sexuality. His first ap- 
proaches, during the early nineties, were from the physi- 
ological and chemical standpoints. In the preface to the 
third edition, Freud makes a few remarks intended to 
prevent misunderstandings and expectations that cannot 
be fulfilled. It must be emphasized that the exposition is 
based entirely upon everyday medical observation, to 
which the findings of psychoanalytic research should 
lend additional depth and scientific significance. 
Throughout the entire work the various factors are 
placed in a particular order of precedence: preference is 
given to the accidental factors, while disposition is left in 
the background, and more weight is attached to onto- 
genesis than to phylogenesis. In the preface to the fourth 
edition, Freud states that some of the contents of the 
book, its insistence on the importance of sexuality in all 
human achievements and the attempt it makes at enlarg- 
ing the concept of sexuality, have from the first pro- 
vided the strongest motives for the resistance against 
psychoanalysis. 



1905D 7/136 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
I: The sexual aberrations: (1). Deviations in respect of 
the sexual object, a.) Inversion b.) Sexually immature 
persons and animals as sexual objects. 

Sexual aberrations are discussed. The person from 
whom sexual attraction proceeds is called the sexual ob- 
ject and the act towards which the instinct tends is 
called the sexual aim. Some deviations in respect of the 
sexual object are presented. The behavior of inverts 
(people with ‘contrary sexual feelings,’ such as homo- 
sexuals) varies greatly in several respects: 1) They may 
be absolute inverts; 2) they may be amphigenic inverts, 
that is psychosexual hermaphrodites, or: 3) they may 
be contingent inverts. The earliest assessments regarded 
inversion as an innate indication of nervous degeneracy. 
The attribution of degeneracy in this connection is open 
to the objections which can be raised against the indis- 
criminate use of the word in general. Innateness is only 
attributed to the first class ol' inverts. Tiie existence of 
the 2 other classes is difficult to reconcile with the hypo- 
thesis of the innateness of inversion. The nature of inver- 
sion is explained neither by the hypothesis that it is 
innate nor by the alternative hypothesis that it is ac- 
quired. The facts of anatomy lead us to suppose that an 
originally bisexual physical disposition has, in the course 
of evolution, become modified into a unisexual one, 



leaving behind only a few traces of the sex that has 
become atrophied. The theory of psychical hermaphro- 
ditism presupposes that the sexual object of an invert is 
the opposite of that of a normal person. No one single 
aim can apply in cases of inversion. Sexual instinct and 
the sexual object are merely close together: sexual in- 
stinct is independent of its object and its origin is not 
likely due to its object’s attractions. Cases in which 
sexually immature persons (children) are chosen as 
sexual objects and cases of sexual intercourse with ani- 
mals are judged as sporadic aberrations. It is concluded 
that under a great number of conditions and in surpris- 
ingly numerous individuals, the nature and importance 
of the sexual object recedes into the background. What 
is essential and constant in the sexual instinct is some- 
thing else. 



1905D 7/149 

Three Essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
I: The sexual aberrations. (2). Deviations in respect of 
the sexual aim. a). Anatomical extensions, b). Fixation 
of preliminary sexual aims. 

Some deviations of the sexual aim are presented. Per- 
versions are sexual activities which either extend, in an 
anatomical sense, beyond the regions of the body that 
are designed for sexual union, or linger over the inter- 
mediate relations to the sexual object which should nor- 
mally be traversed rapidly on the path towards the final 
sexual aim. The use of the mouth as a sexual organ is 
regarded as a perversion if the lips (or tongue) of one 
person are brought into contact with the genitals of 
another, but not if the mucous membrane:, of the lips of 
both of them come together. Where the anus is con- 
cerned it becomes still clearer that it is disgust which 
stamps that sexual aim as a perversion. Unsuitable sub- 
stitutes, called fetishes, (such as hair, piece of clothing, 
etc.) for the sexual object are discussed. Every external 
or internal factor that hinders or postpones the attain- 
ment of the normal sexual aim will evidently lend sup- 
port to the tendency to linger over the preparatory 
activities and to turn them into new sexual aims that can 
take the place of the normal one. Pleasure in looking 
(scopophilia) becomes a perversion if it is restricted 
exclusively to the genitals, or if it is concerned with the 
overriding of disgust, or if, instead of being preparatory 
to the normal sexual aim, it supplants it. The most com- 
mon and the most significant of all the perversions is the 
desire to inflict pain (sadism) upon the sexual object, 
and its reverse (masochism). The roles of passivity and 
activity in sadism and masochism are discussed in view 
of the fact that in this perversion both forms are habit- 
ually found in the same individual. 



46 



0 

ERIC 



55 



190SD 7/170 



190SD 7/160 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
I: The sexual aberrations. (3). The perversions in general. 

The perversions in general are discussed. In the major* 
ity of instances, the pathological character in a perver- 
sion is found to lie not in the content of the new sexual 
aim but in its relation to the normal. If a perversion, 
instead of appearing merely alongside the normal sexual 
aim and object, supplants it completely and takes its 
place in all circumstances, so that the perversion has the 
characteristics of exclusiveness and fixation, then we 
shall be justified in regarding it as a pathological symp- 
tom. The sexual instinct has to struggle against certain 
mental forces which act as resistances, of which shame 
and disgust are the most prominent. Some perversions 
are only made intelligible if we assume the convergence 
of several motive forces. 



1905D 7/163 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
I: The sexual aberrations. (4). The sexual instinct in 
neurotics. 

The sexual instinct in neurotics is discussed. The only 
means of obtaining information about the sexual life of 
persons known as psychoneurotics is through psycho- 
analytic investigation. Experience shows that these 
psychoneuroses, hysteria, obsessional neuroses, neuras- 
thenia, schizophrenia, and paranoia, are based on sexual 
instinctual forces. The removal of the symptoms of 
hysterial patients by psychoanalysis proceeds on the 
supposition that those symptoms are substitutes for a 
number of emotionally cathected mental processes, 
wishes and desires, which, by the operation of a special 
psychical procedure (repression), have been prevented 
from obtaining discharge in psychical activity that is 
admissible to consciousness. The findings of psycho- 
analysis show that symptoms represent a substitute for 
impulses the sources of whose strength is derived from 
the sexual instinct. In the case of anyone who is predis- 
posed to hysteria, the onset of his illness is precipitated 
when he finds himself faced by the demands of a real 
sexual situation. Between the pressure of the instinct 
and his antagonism to sexuality, illness offers excape. 
The sexual instinct of psychoneurotics exhibits all the 
aberrations and manifestations of abnormal sexual life. 
The unconscious mental life of all neurotics shows in- 
verted impulses, fixation of their libido upon persons of 
their own sex. In any fairly marked case of psychoneu- 
rosis it is unusual for only a single one of the perverse 
instincts to be developed. 



1905D 7/167 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
I: The' sexual aberrations. (5). Component instincts and 
erotogenic zones. 

The component instincts and erotogenic zones are 
discussed. An instinct is provisionally understood to be 
the psychical representative of an endosomatic, con- 
tinuously flowing source of stimulation, as contrasted 
with a stimulus, which is set up by single excitations 
coming from without. Excitations of 2 kinds arise from 
the somatic organs, based upon differences of a chemical 
nature. One of these kinds of excitation is specifically 
sexual, and the organ concerned is the erotogenic zone 
of the sexual component instinct arising from it. The 
part played by the erotogenic zones is immediately ob- 
vious in the case of those perversions which assign a 
sexual significance to the oral and anal orifices. In hys- 
teria these parts of the body and the neighboring tracts 
of mucous membrane become the seat of new sensations 
and of changes in innervation in just the same way as do 
the actual genitalia under the excitations of the normal 
sexual processes. In obsessional neurosis, what is striking 
is the significance of those impulses which create new 
sexual aims and seem independent of erotogenic zones. 
In scopophilia and exhibitionism the eye corresponds to 
an erotogenic zone, while in the case of those compo- 
nents of the sexual instinct which involve pain and 
cruelty the same role is assumed by the skin. 

1905D 7/170 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
I: The sexual aberrations. (6). Reasons for the apparent 
preponderance of perverse sexuality in the psychoneu- 
roses. (7). Intimation of the infantile character of 
sexuality. 

Most psychoneurotics fall ill only after the age of 
puberty as a result of the demands made upon them by 
normal sexual life, or illnesses of this kind set in later 
when the libido fails to obtain satisfaction along normal 
lines. In both cases the libido behaves like a stream 
whose main bed has become blocked and it proceeds to 
fill up collateral channels which may hitherto have been 
empty. Thus what appears to be the strong tendency of 
psychoneurotics to perversion may be collaterally deter- 
mined and must be collaterally intensified. Different 
cases of neurosis may behave differently: in one case the 
preponderating factor may be the innate strength of the 
tendency to perversion, in another it may be the collat- 
eral increase of that tendency owing to the libido being 
forced away from a normal sexual aim and sexual object. 
Neurosis will always produce its greatest effects when 
constitution and experience work together in rhe same 
direction. The disposition to perversions is itself of no 
great rarity but must form a part of what passes as the 



47 



0 



56 



1905 D 7/173 



normal constitution. It is debatable whether the perver- 
sions go back to innate determinants or arise owing to 
chance experiences. There is something innate lying 
behind the perversions but it is something innate in 
everyone, though as a disposition it may vary in its in- 
tensity and may be increased by the influences of actual 
life. The postulated constitution, containing the germs 
of all the perversions, will only be demonstrable in child- 
ren, even though in them it is only with modest degrees 
of intensity that any of the instincts can emerge. Thus a 
formula emerges which states that the sexuality of neu- 
rotics has remained in, or has been brought bade to, an 
infantile state. 

1905 D 7/173 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
II: Infantile sexuality: (1). The period of sexual latency 
in childhood and its interruptions. 

infantile amnesia, which turns everyone’s childhood 
into something like a prehistoric epoch and conceals 
from him the beginnings of his own sexual life, is respon- 
sible for the fact that no importance is attached to child- 
hood in the development of sexual life. The period of 
sexual latency in childhood and its interruptions are 
discussed. The germs of sexual impulses are already pres- 
ent in the newborn child and these continue to develop 
for a time, but are then overtaken by a progressive 
process of suppression; this in turn is itself interrupted 
by periodical advances in sexual development or may be 
held up by individual peculiarities. The sexual life of 
children usually emerges in a form accessible to observa- 
tion around the third or fourth year of life. It is during 
the period of total or only partial latency that the men- 
tal forces which later impede the course of the sexual 
instinct are built up. Powerful components are acquired 
for every kind of cultural achievement by the diversion 
of sexual instinctual forces from sexual aims and their 
direction to new ones, a process called sublimation. The 
same process plays a part in the development of the 
individual and its beginning is in the period of sexual 
latency of childhood. Interruptions of the latency period 
are discussed. 



1905D 7/179 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
II: Infantile sexuality. (2). The manifestations of in- 
fantile sexuality. 



a catching hold of some part of another person for the 
same purpose. Sensual sucking involves a complete ab- 
sorption of the attention and leads either to sleep or 
even to a motor reaction in the nature of an orgasm. The 
behavior of a child who indulges in thumbsucking is 
determined by a search for some pleasure which has 
already been experienced and is now remembered. To 
begin with, sexual activity attaches itself to functions 
serving the purpose of self-preservation and does not 
become independent of them until later. The 3 essential 
characteristics of an infantile sexual manifestation are: 
1) at its origin it attaches itself to one of the vital so- 
matic functions; 2) it has as yet no sexual object, and is 
thus autoerotic; and 3) its sexual aim is dominated by an 
erotogenic zone. 

1905D 7/183 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
II: Infantile sexuality. (3). The sexual aim of infantile 
sexuality. 

The sexual aim of infantile sexuality is discussed. An 
erotogenic zone is a part of the skin or mucous mem- 
brane in which stimuli of a certain sort evoke a feeling of 
pleasure possessing a particular quality. A rhythmic 
character must play a part among the special conditions 
which produce the pleasure. There are predestined ero- 
togenic zones; however, any other part of the skin or 
mucous membrane can take over the functions in that 
direction. Thus the quality of the stimulus has more to 
do with producing the pleasurable feeling than has the 
nature of the part of the body concerned. A child who 
indulges in sensual sacking searches about bis body and 
chooses some part of it to suck, a part which is after- 
wards preferred by him by force of habit. A precisely 
analogous tendency to displacement is also found in the 
symptomatology of hysteria; here repression affects 
most of all the actual genital zones and these transmit 
their susceptibility to stimulation to other erotogenic 
zones which then behave exactly like genitals. The sex- 
ual aim of the infantile instinct consists in obtaining 
satisfaction by means of an appropriate stimulation of 
the erotogenic zone which has been selected in one way 
or another. This satisfaction must have been previously 
experienced in order to have left behind a need for its 
repetition. A sexual aim consists in replacing the pro- 
jected sensation of stimulation in the erotogenic zone by 
an external stimulus which removes that sensation by 
producing a feeling of satisfaction. 



The manifestations of infantile sexuality are dis- 
cussed. Thumbsucking (or sensual sucking) is regarded as 
an example of the sexual manifestations of childhood. 
Thumbsucking appears in early infancy and may con- 
tinue into maturity, or even persist all through life. A 
grasping instinct may appear anc may manifest itself as a 
simultaneous rhythmic tugging at the lobes of the ears or 



1905D 7/185 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
II: Infantile sexuality. (4). Masturbatory sexual mani- 
festations. 

Masturbatory sexual manifestations are discussed. 
The anal zone is well suited by its position to act as a 



S7 

o 

ERJC 



48 



1905D 7/200 



medium through which sexuality may attach itself to 
other somatic functions. The intestinal disturbances 
which are so common in childhood see to it that this 
zone does not lack intense excitations. The masturbation 
of early infancy seems to disappear after a short time, 
but at some point of childhood (usually before the 
fourth year) the sexual instinct belonging to the genital 
zone usually revives and persists for a time until it is 
once more surpressed, or it may continue without inter- 
ruption. The sexual excitation returns, either as a cen- 
trally determined tickling stimulus which seeks satis- 
faction in masturbation, or as a process in the nature of 
nocturnal emission which, like the nocturnal emissions 
of adult years, achieves satisfaction without the help of 
any action by the subject. The reappearance of sexual 
activity is determined by internal causes and external 
contingencies, both of which can be guessed at in cases 
of neurotic illness from the form taken by their symp- 
toms. Under the influence of seduction, children can 
become pclymorphously perverse, and can be led into all 
possible kinds of sexual irregularities. This shows that an 
aptitude for them is innately present in their disposition. 
Infantile sexual life, in spite of the preponderating 
dominance of erotogenic zones, exhibits components 
which involve other people as sexual objects. Such are 
the instincts of scopophilia, exhibitionism and cruelty. 
The cruel component of the sexual instinct develops in 
childhood even more independently of the sexual activi- 
ties that are attached to erotogenic zones. The impulse 
of cruelty arises from the instinct for mastery and ap- 
pears at a period of sexual life at which the genitals have 
not yet taken over their later role. It then dominates a 
phase of sexual life which is described as a pregenital 
organization. 



1905D 7/194 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
II: Infantile sexuality. (5). The sexual researches of 
childhood. 

At about the same time as the sexual life of children 
reaches its first peak, between the ages of 3 and 5, the 
children begin to show signs of the activity which may 
be ascribed to the instinct for knowledge or research. Its 
activity corresponds to a sublimated manner of obtain- 
ing mastery, while it also makes use of the eneigy of 
scopophilia. A male child believes that a genital like his 
own is to be attributed to everyone he knows, and he 
cannot make its absence tally with his picture of these 
other people. This conviction is energetically maintained 
by boys; is obstinately defended against the contradic- 
tions which soon result from observation; and is only 
abandoned after severe internal struggles (the castration 
complex). The substitutes for the penis which they feel 
is missing in women play a great part in determining the 
form taken by many perversions. When girls see that 



boys’ genitals are formed differently from their own, 
they are ready to recognize them immediately and are 
overcome by envy for the penis. Children’s theories of 
birth are discussed as is their sadistic view of sexual 
intercourse. The sexual theories of children are, in gen- 
eral, reflections of their own sexual constitution. In spite 
of their grotesque errors, the theories show more under- 
standing of sexual processes than children are given 
credit for. 



1905D 7/197 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
II: Infantile sexuality. (6). The phases of development of 
the sexual organization. 

Infantile sexual life is essentially autoerotic and its 
individual component instincts are disconnected and 
independent of one another in their search for pleasure. 
The study of the inhibitions and disturbances of the 
process of development of the sexual organization 
enables us to recognize abortive beginnings and prelim- 
inary stages of a firm organization of the component 
instincts. The name pregenital is given to organizations 
of sexual life in which the genital zones have not yet 
taken over their predominant part. The first of these is 
the oral organization. A second pregenital phase is that 
of the sadistic anal organization. In this stage sexual 
polarity and an extraneous object are observable but or- 
ganization and subordination to the reproductive func- 
tion are still absent. This form of sexual organization can 
persist throughout life and can permanently attract a 
large portion of sexual activity. The opposing pairs of 
instincts (activity and passivity) are developed to an 
equal extent and are described by the term ambivalence. 
It is concluded that the whole of the sexual currents 
have become directed towards a single person in relation 
to whom they seek to achieve their aims, this then being 
the closest approximation possible in childhood to the 
final form taken by sexual life after puberty. It maybe 
regarded as typical of the choice of an object that the 
process is diphasic, that is, that it occurs in 2 waves. The 
firs 1 : of these begins between the ages of 2 and 5, and is 
brought to a halt or to a retreat by the latency period. 
The second wave starts with puberty and determines the 
final outcome of sexual life. 



1905D 7/200 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
II: Infantile sexuality. (7). The sources of infantile 
sexuality. 

Sexual excitation arises: 1) as a reproduction of a 
satisfaction experienced in connection with other or- 
ganic processes; 2) through appropriate peripheral stimu- 
lation of erotogenic zones; and 3) as an expression of 



49 



58 



1 



1905T 7/207 

certain instincts. Sexual excitation can also be produced 
by rhythmic mechanical agitation of the body. Stimuli 
of this kind operate in 3 different ways: on the sensory 
apparatus of the vestibular nerves, on the skin, and on 
the deeper parts. Children feel a need for a large amount 
of active muscular exercise and derive extraordinary 
pleasure from satisfying it. In many people, the infantile 
connection between romping and sexual excitation is 
among the determinants of the direction subsequently 
taken by their sexual instinct. All comparatively intense 
affective processes, including even terrifying ones, in- 
fringe upon sexuality, a fact which may incidentally help 
to explain the pathogenic effect of emotions of that 
kind. Concentration of the attention upon an intellec- 
tual task and intellectual strain in general produce a 
concomitant sexual excitation in many young people as 
well as adults. The same pathways along which sexual 
disturbances infringe upon the other somatic functions 
also perform another important function in normal 
health; they serve for the attraction of sexual instinctual 
forces to aims that are other than sexual, that is to say, 
for the sublimation of sexuality. 



1905D 7/207 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
III: The transformations of puberty. (1). The primacy of 
the genital zones and the fore-pleasure. 

With the arrival of puberty, changes set in which are 
destined to give infantile sexual life its final, normal 
shape. A normal sexual life is only assured by an exact 
convergence of the affectionate current and the sensual 
current both being directed towards the sexual object 
and sexual aim. The new sexual aim in men consists in 
the discharge of the sexual products. The most striking 
of the processes at puberty has been picked upon as 
constituting its essence: the manifest growth of the ex- 
ternal genitalia. Stimuli can impinge on it from 3 direc- 
tions: from the external world by means of the excita- 
tion of the erotogenic zones, from the organic interior, 
and from mental life, which is a storehouse for external 
impressions and a receiver for internal excitations. All 
three types of stimuli produce sexual excitement. The 
erotogenic zones are used to provide a certain amount of 
pleasure by being stimulated in the way appropriate to 
them. This pleasure then leads to an increase in tension 
which in its turn is responsible for producing the neces- 
sary motor energy for the conclusion of the sexual act. 
The penultimate stage of that act is once again the 
appropriate stimulation of an erotogenic zone by the 
appropriate object; and from the pleasure yielded by this 
excitation the motor energy is obtained, this time by a 
reflex path, which brings about the discharge of the 
sexual substances. 



1905D 7/212 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
III: The transformations of puberty. (2). The problem of 
sexual excitation. 

The problem of sexual excitation is discussed. We 
remain in complete ignorance both of the origin and of 
the nature of the sexual tension which arises simul- 
taneously with the pleasure when erotogenic zones are 
satisfied. A certain degree of sexual tension is required 
for the excitability of the erotogenic zones. The accumu- 
lation of the sexual substances creates and maintains 
sexual tension; the pressure of these products upon the 
walls of the vesicles containing them might be supposed 
to act as a stimulus upon a spinal center, the condition 
of which would be perceived by higher centers and 
would then give consciousness to the familiar sensation 
of tension. Observations on castrated males seem to 
show that sexual excitation can occur to a considerable 
degree independently of the production of the sexual 
substances. It seems probable that special chemical sub- 
stances are produced in the interstitial portion of the sex 
glands; these are then taken up in the blood stream and 
cause particular parts of the central nervous system to be 
charged with sexual tension. It is concluded that sub- 
stances of a peculiar kind arise from sexual metabolism. 



1905D 7/217 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
III: The transformations of puberty. (3). The libido 
theory. 

The libido theory is discussed. Libido is defined as a 
quantitatively variable force which could serve as a 
measure of processes and transformations occurring in 
the field of sexual excitation. The idea of a quantity of 
libido is presented and the mental representation of it is 
given the name of ego libido. The production, increase 
or diminution, distribution and displacement of it 
should afford us possibilities for explaining the psycho- 
sexual phenomena observed. This ego libido is, however, 
only conveniently accessible to analytic study when it 
has been put to the use of cathecting sexual objects, that 
is, when it has become object libido. It should be the 
task of a libido theory of neurotic and psychotic dis- 
orders to express all the observed phenomena and in- 
ferred processes in terms of the economics of the libido. 
In contrast to object libido, ego libido is described as 
narcissistic libido. Narcissistic or ego libido seems to be 
the great reservoir from which the object cathexes are 
sent out and into which they are withdrawn once more; 
the narcissistic libidinal cathexis of the ego is the original 
state of things, realized in earliest childhood, and is 
merely covered by the later extrusions of libido, but in 
essentials persists behind them. 





50 




7/244 



1905D 7/219 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
III: The transformations of puberty (4). The differen- 
tiation between men and women. 

The differentiation between men and women is dis- 
cussed. It is not until puberty that the sharp distinction 
is established between the masculine and feminine 
characters. From that time on, this contrast has a more 
decisive influence than any other upon the shaping of 
human life. The development of the inhibitions of sex- 
uality takes place in little girls earlier and in the face of 
less resistance than in boys. The autoerotic activity of 
the erotogenic zones is, however, the same in both sexes. 
The leading erotogenic zone in female children is located 
at the clitoris, and is thus homologous to the masculine 
genital zone of the glans penis. Puberty, which brings 
about so great an accession of libido in boys, is marked 
in girls by a fresh wave of expression, in which it is 
precisely clitoral sexuality that is affected. When erotog- 
enic susceptibility to stimulation has been successfully 
transferred by a woman from the clitoris to the vaginal 
orifice, it implies that she has adopted a new leading 
zone for the purpose of her later sexual activity. A man 
retains his leading zone unchanged from childhood. 



1905D 7/222 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Chapter 
III: The transformations of puberty. (5). The finding of 
an object. 

The processes at puberty establish the primacy of the 
genital zones; and in a man, the penis, which has now 
become capable of erection, presses forward insistently 
towards the new sexual aim, penetration into a cavity in 
the body which excites his genital zone. Simultaneously 
on the psychical side the process of finding an object, 
for which preparations have been made from earliest 
childhood, is completed. All through the period of la- 
tency children learn to feel for other people who help 
them in their helplessness and satisfy their needs. Their 
love is modeled after and a continuation of, their rela- 
tion as sucklings to their mother. Children behave as 
though their dependence on the people locking after 
them were in the nature of sexual love. Anxiety in child- 
ren is originally an expression of the fact that they are 
feeling the loss of the person they love. The barrier 
against incest is maintained by the postponing of sexual 
maturation until the child can respect the cultural taboo 
upheld by society. The sexual life of maturing youth is 
almost entirely restricted to indulging in phantasies. 
When incestuous fantasies are overcome, detachment 
from parental authority is completed. The closer one 
comes to the deeper disturbances of psychosexual de- 
velopment, the more unmistakably the importance of 
incestuous object choice emerges. In psychoneurotics, a 



large portion or the whole of their psychosexual activity 
in finding an object remains in the unconscious as a 
result of their repudiation of sexuality. Even a person 
who has avoided an incestuous fixation of his libido does 
not entirely escape its influence. One of the tasks impli- 
cit in object choice is that it "hould find its way to the 
opposite sex. 

1905D 7/231 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). 
Summary. 

The onset of sexual development in human beings 
occurs in 2 phases. This appears to be one of the neces- 
sary conditions of the aptitude of men for developing a 
higher civilization, but also of their tendency to neu- 
rosis. It is not rare to find perversions and psychoneu- 
roses occurring in the same family, and distributed 
between the 2 sexes in such a way that the male mem- 
bers of the family are positive perverts, while the fe- 
males, are negative perverts, that is, hysterics. This is 
good evidence of the essential conditions which exist 
between the 2 disorders. If an abnormal relationship 
between all the different dispositions persists and grows 
stronger at maturity, the result can only be a perverse 
sexual life. If the genital zone is weak, the combination, 
which is required to take place at puberty, is bound to 
fail, and the strongest of the other components of 
sexuality will continue its activity as a perversion. If in 
the course of development some of the components 
which are of excessive strength in the disposition are 
submitted to the process of repression, the excitations 
concerned continue to be generated as before; but they 
are prevented by psychical obstruction from attaining 
their aim and are diverted into numerous other channels 
until they find their way to expression as symptoms. 
Sublimation enables excessively strong excitations aris- 
ing from particular sources of sexuality to find an outlet 
and use in other fields, so that an increase in psychical 
efficiency results from a disposition which in itself is 
perilous. 

7/244 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality (1905). Ap- 
pendix: List of writings by Freud dealing predominantly 
or largely with sexuality. 



A list of writings by Freud dealing predominantly or 
largely with sexuality is presented. References to sex- 
uality are to be found in a large majority of Freud’s 
writings. This list of 33 writings comprises those which 
are more directly concerned with the subject . They date 
from 1898 to 1940 and include: Sexuality in the Eti- 
ology of the Neuroses; The Sexual Enlightenment of 
Children; Character and Anal Erotism; Contributions to 
a Discussion on Masturbation; The Disposition to 
Obsessional Neurosis; On Narcissism: an Introduction; 

*0 



1904A 7/249 



On ihe Transformation of Instincts, with Special Refer- 
ence to Anal Erotism; The Taboo of Virginity; The 
Infantile Genital Organization; The Economic Problem 
of Masturbation; The Dissolution of the Oedipus Com- 
plex; Fetishism; Libidinal Types; and Splitting of the 
Ego in the Process of Defense. 

1904A 7/249 

Freud’s psycho-analytic procedure (1904). 

Freud’s psychotherapeutic procedure, described as 
psychoanalysis, is an outgrowth of the cathartic method. 
The cathartic method presupposed that the patient 
could be Hypnotized, and was based on the widening of 
consciousness that occurs under hypnosis. Its aim was 
the removal of the pathological symptoms. The cathartic 
method renounced suggestion; Freud gave up hypnosis 
as well and found a substitute for hypnosis in the asso- 
ciations of his patients. Freud insisted that the patients 
include everything that comes into their heads when 
they discuss their case history. Freud noticed that gaps 
(amnesias) appeared in the patient’s memory thus mak- 
ing up the determining factor of his entire theory. If the 
patient is urged to fill the gaps discomfort occurs when 
the memory really returns. From this Freud concludes 
that the amnesias are the result of a process which he 
calls repression and the motive for which he finds in 
feelings of unpleasure. The psychical forces which have 
brought about this repression can be detected in the 
resistance which operates against the recovery of the lost 
memories. The factor of resistance has become a corner- 
stone of his theory. The greater the resistance, the 
greater the distortion of the repressed psychical phe- 
nomena. Freud developed the art of interpretation 
which takes on the task of extracting repressed thoughts 
from unintentional ideas. The work of interpretation is 
applied not only to the patient’s ideas but also to his 
dreams. The therapeutic procedure remains the same for 
all the various clinical pictures that maybe presented in 
hysteria and all forms of obsessional neurosis. The quali- 
fications that are required for anyone who is to be bene- 
ficially affected by psychoanalysis include: periods of 
psychically normal condition, natural intelligence, and 
ethical development. 

1905A 7/257 
On psychotherapy (1905). 

On Psychotherapy was delivered as a lecture before 
the Wiener medizinisches Doktorenkollegium on Decem- 
ber 12, 1904. Psychotherapy is not a modem method of 
treatment. The majority of primitive and ancient medi- 
cal methods must be classed under the head of psycho- 
therapy. Certain diseases, in particular, the psychoneu- 
roses, are far more readily accessible to mental influ- 
ences than to any other form of medication. The many 



ways and means of practicing psychotherapy that lead to 
recovery are good. Several thoughts are presented 
concerning psychotherapy. 1) This method is often 
confused with hypnotic treatment by suggestion. There 
is the greatest possible degree of antithesis between these 
2 techniques. Suggestion is not concerned with the 
origin, strength and meaning of morbid states but super- 
imposes a suggestion hopefully capable of restraining the 
pathogenic idea. Analysis concerns itself with the genesis 
of the morbid symptoms and its function is to bring out 
factors during analysis. 2) The technique of searching for 
the origins of an illness and removing its manifestations 
is not easy and can not be practiced without training. 
3) The analytic investigation and probing do not indicate 
speedy results and resistance can result in unpleasant- 
ness; however, all the effort of psychoanalytic therapy 
seems worthwhile when we consider that it has made a 
large number of patients who were permanently unfit 
for existence, fit for existence. 4) The indications or 
contraindications for psychoanalysis are that a patient 
should have a reasonable degree of education and a fairly 
reliable character, a normal mental condition, and be less 
than 50 yrs. old. Psychoanalysis should not be at- 
tempted when speedy removal of dangerous symptoms is 
required. 5) No injury to the patient is to be feared 
when the treatment is conducted with comprehension. 
6) It is concluded that this therapy is based on the recog- 
nition that unconscious ideas, or the unconsciousness of 
certain mental processes, are the direct cause of the 
morbid symptoms. Psychoanalytic treatment may, in 
general, be conceived of as a re-education in overcoming 
internal resistances. Freud’s last comment is to advise 
against recommending sexual activity in psychoneuroses. 

1906 A 7/271 

My views on the part played by sexuality in the aeti- 
ology of the neuroses (1906). 

The part played by sexuality in the etiology of the 
neuroses is discussed. Originally, Freud’s theory related 
only to the clinical pictures comprised under the term 
neurasthenia including neurasthenia proper and anxiety 
neurosis. With more experiences, it was discovered that 
the cause of lifelong hysterical neuroses lies in what are 
in themselves the trivial sexual experiences of early 
childhood. A number of phantasies of seduction are ex- 
plained as attempts at fending off memories of the sub- 
ject s own sexual activity (infantile masturbation). The 
importance of sexuality and of infantilism are stressed. 
The patient’s symptoms constitute his sexual activity, 
which arise from the sources of the normal or perverse 
component instincts of sexuality. The etiology of the 
neuroses comprises everything which can act in a detri- 
mental manner upon the processes serving the sexual 
function. The most important are the noxae which 
affect the sexual function itself; next are every other 



61 



52 



I905C 8/3 



type of noxa and trauma which, by causing general 
damage to the organism, may lead secondarily to injury 
to its sexual processes. The onset of illness is the product 
of a summation of etiological factors and the necessary 
total of these factors can be completed from any direc- 
tion. 

1905B 7/283 

Psychical (or mental) treatment (19d5). 

Psychical treatment denotes treatment taking its start 
in the mind, treatment (whether of mental or physical 
disorders) by measures which operate upon the human 
mind. Foremost among such measures is the use of 
words, and words are the essential tool of mental treat- 
ment. There is a large number of patients, suffering from 
disorders of greater or less severity, whose disorders and 
complaints make great demands on the skill of their 
physicians, but in whom no visible or observable signs of 
a pathological process can be discovered. One group of 
these patients are distinguished by the copiousness and 
variety of their symptoms (which are influenced by ex- 
citement). In this case, the illness is of the nervous sys- 
tem, as a whole and is called “nervousness” (neuras- 
thenia or hysteria). The affects are often sufficient in 
themselves to bring about both diseases of the nervous 
system accompanied by manifest anatomical changes 
and also diseases of other organs. States of illness that 
are already present can be considerably influenced by 
violent affects. The processes of volition and attention 
are also capable of exercising a profound effect on soma- 
tic processes and of playing a large part in promoting or 
preventing physical illnesses. The mental state of expec- 
tation puts in motion a number of mental forces that 
have the greatest influence on the onset and cure (such 
as faith or miracle cure) of physical diseases. The use of 
hypnosis and the knowledge gained from it are dis- 
cussed. By means of hypnosis the mind can increase its 
control over the body and the physician can cause 
changes in the patient’s waking state by posthypnotic 
suggestion. Disadvantages of hypnosis include the 
damage it can cause and the patient’s dependence on the 
physician. 

1942 A 7/305 

Psychopathic characters on the stage (1942). 

Psychopathic characters on the stage are discussed. 
The purpose of drama is to reveal sources of pleasure or 
enjoyment in our emotional life. In this respect the 
prime factor is the process of getting rid of one’s own 
emotions; the consequent enjoyment corresponds to the 
relief produced by a thorough discharge and to an 
accompanying sexual excitation. The spectator’s enjoy- 
ment is based on illusion; it is someone other than 
himself who is acting and suffering on the stage, and it is 



only a game, which can not damage his personal secu- 
rity. Drama seeks to explore emotional possibilities and 
give an enjoyable shape even to forebodings of misfor- 
tune. Suffering of every kind is the subject matter of 
drama, and from this suffering it promises to give the 
audience' pleasure. The other precondition of this art 
form is that it should not cause suffering to the audience 
but should compensate for the sympathetic suffering 
which is aroused. People are acquainted with mental 
suffering principally in connection with the circum- 
stances in which it is acquired; accordingly, dramas deal- 
ing with it require some event out of which the illness 
shall arise and they open with an exposition of this 
event. The event must involve conflict and must include 
an effort of will together with resistance. Religious 
drama, social drama, and drama of character differ essen- 
tially in the terrain on which the action that leads to the 
suffering is fought out. Psychological and psychopatho- 
logical drama are discussed next. Hamlet is distinguished 
with reference to 3 characteristics. l)The hero is not 
psychopathic, but only becomes psychopathic in the 
course of the play. 2) The repressed impulse is one of 
those which are similarly repressed in all of us; this re- 
pression is shaken up by the situation in the play. 3) The 
impulse that is struggling into consciousness is never 
given a definite name so that in the spectator the process 
is carried through with liis attention averted , and he is in 
the grip of his emotions instead of taking stock of what 
is happening. A certain amount of resistance is saved in 
this way. It is concluded that the neurotic instability of 
the public and the dramatist’s skill in avoiding resist- 
ances and offering forepleasures can alone determine the 
limits set upon the use of abnormal characters on the 
stage. 

VOL. VIII Jokes and their Relation to 
the Unconscious (1905) 

1905C 8/3 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1960). 
Jiditor’s preface. 

In the course of discussing the relation between jokes 
and dreams, Freud mentions his own subjective reason 
for taking up the problem of jokes: the fact that when 
Wilhelm Fliess was reading the proofs of The Interpreta- 
tion of Dreams in the autumn of 1899, he complained 
that the dreams were too full of jokes. The episode acted 
as a precipitating factor, and led to Freud’s giving closer 
attention to the subject; but it cannot possibly have 
been the origin of his interest in it. Quite apart from 
dreams, there is evidence of Freud’s early theoretical 
interest in jokes. There is a serious difficulty in 
translating this particular work, a terminological diffi- 
culty which runs through the whole of it. The German 



C' 



S3 



62 



1905C 8/9 



and English terms covering the phenomena discussed 
seem never to coincide. 

1905C 8/9 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
A. Analytic part. I. Introduction. 

Anyone who has had occasion to enquire from the 
literature of esthetics and psychology the nature of jokes 
and the position they occupy will probably have to 
admit that jokes have not received nearly as much 
philosophical consideration as they deserve in view of 
the part they play in mental life. The first impression 
one derives from the literature is that it is quite 
impracticable to deal with jokes otherwise than in 
connection with the comic. A favorite definition of 
joking has long been the ability to find similarity 
between dissimilar things, that is, hidden similarities. 
The criteria and characteristics of jokes include: activity, 
relation to the content of our thoughts, the character- 
istic of playful judgment, the coupling of dissimilar 
things, contrasting ideas, sense in nonsense, the succes- 
sion of bewilderment and enlightenment, the bringing 
forward of what is hidden, and the peculiar brevity of 
wit. We are entirely without insight into the connection 
that presumably exists between the separate determi- 
nants (Le. what the brevity of a joke can have to do with 
its characteristic of being a playful judgment). 

1905C 8/16 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
A. Analytic part. II. The technique of jokes (1) & 
(2). Jokes are similar to dreams. 

The character of a joke does not reside in the thought 
but in the technique. Examples are given of jokes in 
which the thought is condensed by introducing, as a 
substitute, a striking composite word (e.g. anecdotage 
for anecdote and dotage) which is unintelligible in itself 
but is immediately understood in its context. In related 
cases the substitute is not a composite word but a slight 
modification (e.g. tete-a-bete for tete-a-tete). In general, 
the slighter the modification, the better the joke. 
Condensation and modification involved in these types 
of jokes are compared to condensation and modification 
which occurs in dream-work. 

1905C 8/29 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
A. Analytic part. If. The technique of jokes. (3). 
Condensations and substitutive formations in dreams. 

The first thing that we want to learn is whether the 
process of condensation with substitute formation is to 
be discovered in every joke, and can therefore be 
regarded as a universal characteristic of the technique of 
jokes. Three examples are presented in which substitute 



formation does not occur. In each of them, a name is 
used twice, once as a whole and again divided up into its 
separate syllables, which, when they are thus separated, 
give another sense. The multiple use of the same word, 
once as a whole and again in the syllables into which it 
falls, is the first instance we have come across of a 
technique differing from that of condensation. The cases 
of multiple use, which can also be brought together 
under the title of double meaning, can easily be divided 
into subclasses: 1) cases of the double meaning of a 
name and of a thing denoted by it; 2) double meaning 
arising from the literal and metaphorical meanings of a 
word; and 3) double meaning proper, or play upon 
words. 

1905C 8/45 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
A. Analytic part. II. The technique of jokes. (4) & 
(5). Summary and puns. 

The different joke techniques are summarized as 
follows: condensation, with formation of composite 
word or with modification; the multiple use of the same 
material as a whole and in parts, in a different order, 
with slight modification, and of the same words full and 
empty; and double meaning as a name and as a thing, 
metaphorical and literal meanings, double meaning 
proper (play upon words), double entendre, and double 
meaning with an allusion. The multiple use of the same 
material is only a special case of condensation; play 
upon words is nothing other than a condensation 
without substitute formation. All these techniques are 
dominated by a tendency to compression; or rather to 
saving (economy). The most numerous group of jokes is 
influencedby the contempt with which they are regarded. 
This kind is generally known as puns and passes as the 
lowest form of verbal joke, probably because it can be 
made with the least trouble. Puns make the least demand 
on the technique of expression, just as the play upon 
words proper makes the highest. Puns merely form a 
subspecies of the group which reaches its peak in the 
play upon words proper. 

1905C 8/47 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
A. Analytic part. II. The technique of jokes. (6) & 
(7). Puns; absurdity as a joke technique. 

There are jokes whose technique resists almost any 
attempt to connect it with the groups (those derived 
from condensation, multiple use of the same material or 
double meaning) that have been considered. In the case 
of a displacement joke, the joke itself contains a train of 
thought in which a displacement has been accomplished. 
The displacement is part of the work which has created 
the joke; it is not part of the work necessary for 
understanding it. The technique of the nonsensical or 



54 



0 



63 



190SC 8/91 



9 

ERIC 



absurd jokes consists in presenting something that is 
stupid and nonsensical, the sense of which lies in the 
revelation and demonstration of something else that is 
stupid and nonsensical. A number of displacement and 
nonsensical jokes are presented and analyzed. 



190SC 8/60 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
A. Analytic part. 11. The technique of jokes. (8) & 
(9). Relation of jokes to the comic; unification as a joke 
technique. 

The uncovering of psychical automatism is one of the 
techniques of the comic, just as is any kind of revelation 
or self-betrayal. The technique of this group of jokes lies 
in bringing forward faulty reasoning. Unification lies at 
the bottom of jokes that can be described as ready 
repartees. Repartee consists in the defense going to meet 
the aggression, in turning the tables on someone, or 
paying someone back in his own coin, that is, in 
establishing an unexpected unity between attack and 
counterattack. Unification has another, quite specially 
interesting technical instrument at its disposal: stringing 
tilings together with the conjunction ‘and’. If things are 
strung together in this way, it implies that they are 
connected: understanding it as so cannot be helped. 



1905C 8/70 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
A. Analytic part. 11. The technique of jokes. (10) & 
(11). Representation by opposite; conceptual jokes. 

Examples are presented of jokes in which the 
technique employed is “representation by the opposite”, 
e.g. representation of ugliness through resemblances to 
what is most beautiful. In some cases this technique can 
be combined with displacement. A related technique is 
the use of overstatement. Representation by the oppo- 
site is not confined to jokes but may be used in irony. 
Representation by something similar or akin forms the 
basis for another category of jokes. This technique is 
often complicated by allusion. The replacing element 
may be merely a resemblance in sound but, in contrast 
to puns, the resemblance in sound involves whole 
sentences or phrases rather than just 2 words. Another 
kind of allusion consists in omission; this type of joke 
often cannot be distinguished from condensation with- 
out formation of a substitute. Allusion, which is 
probably the commonest and most easily used method 
of joking and which forms a basis for most short-lived 
jokes found in conversations, can be described as 
indirect representation. Categories of jokes discussed so 
far which would fall into this category include faulty 
reasoning, unification, and representation by the 
opposite. 



1905C 8/81 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
A. Analytic part. II. The technique of jokes. (12). 
Analogy as a joke technique. 

Analogy is a kind of indirect representation used by 
jokes. There are remarkably fine and effective examples 
of analogies that do not strike us as being jokes. There 
are also analogies which contain a striking juxtaposition, 
often a combination that sounds absurd, or which are 
replaced by something of the sort as the outcome of the 
analogy. A strange juxtaposition or the attribution of an 
absurd epithet can stand by itself as the outcome of an 
analogy. An analogy can in itself possess the character- 
istics of being a joke, without this impression being 
accounted for by a complication with one of the familiar 
joke techniques. Analogy is included among the species 
of indirect representation used by the joke technique. 

1905C 8/91 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
A. Analytic part. HI. The purposes of jokes. (1) & 
(2). Innocent jokes; smut and the purpose of jokes. 

The purpose of jokes is discussed. Innocent or 
abstract jokes (both are nontendentious) do not have the 
same meaning as jokes that are trivial or lacking in 
substance; they merely connote the opposite of the 
tendentious jokes. An innocent joke may be of great 
substance, it may assert something of value. We receive 
from joking remarks a total impression in which we are 
unable to separate the share taken by the thought 
content from the share taken by the joke work. Where a 
joke is not an aim in itself (where it is not innocent), it is 
either a hostile joke (serving the purpose of aggressive- 
ness, satire, or defense) or an obscene joke (serving the 
purpose of exposure). The technical species of the joke, 
whether it is a verbal or a conceptual joke, bears no 
relation to these 2 purposes. A tendentious joke calls for 
3 people: in addition to the one who makes the joke, 
there must be a second who is taken as the object of the 
hostile or sexual aggressiveness, and a third in whom the 
joke’s aim of producing pleasure is fulfilled. When the 
first person finds his libidinal impulse inhibited by a 
woman, he develops a hostile trend against that second 
person and calls on the originally interfering third person 
as his ally. Through the first person’s smutty speech the 
woman is exposed before the third, who, as a listener, 
has now been bribed by the effortless satisfaction of his 
own libido. Thus jokes make possible the satisfaction of 
instinct (whether lustful or hostile) in the face of an 
obstacle which stands in the way. The obstacle in the 
way is woman’s incapacity to tolerate undisguised 
sexuality. This power which makes it difficult or 
impossible for women, and to a lesser degree for men as 
well, to enjoy undisguised obscenity is termed repres- 
sion. Tendentious jokes have sources of pleasure at their 



55 



64 



455-582 0 - 72-5 



190SC 8/102 



disposal besides those open to innocent jokes, in which 
all the pleasure is in some way linked to their technique. 

1905C 8/102 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
A. Analytic part. 111. The purpose of jokes. (3), (4), 
(5). Hostile, cynical anc '■ eptical jokes. 

Hostile impulses against our fellow men have always 
been subject to the same restrictions, the same progres- 
sive repression, as oi: sexual urges. A joke will allow us 
to exploit something ridiculous in our enemy which we 
could not, on account of obstacles in the way, bring 
forward openly or consciously; here again the joke will 
evade restrictions and open sources of pleasure that have 
become inaccessible. Tendentious jokes are highly suit- 
able for attacks on the great, the dignified and the 
mighty, who are protected by internal inhibition and 
external circumstances from direct disparagement. 
Among the institutions which cynical jokes are in the 
habit of attacking none is more important or more 
strictly guarded by oral regulations than the institution 
of marriage, at which the majority of cynical jokes are 
aimed. There is no more personal claim than that for 
sexual freedom and at no point has civilization tried to 
exercise more severe suppression than in the sphere of 
sexuality. A particularly favorable occasion for tenden- 
tious jokes is presented when the intended rebellious 
criticism is directed against the subject himself, or 
against someone ini whom the subject has a share, a 
collective person, (the subject’s own nation, for in- 
stance). Jokes that attack not a person or an institution 
but the certainty of our knowledge itself are called 
skeptical jokes. 

1905C 8/117 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
B. Synthetic part. IV. The mechanism of pleasure and 
the psychogenesis of jokes. ( 1 ). 

The mechanism of pleasure and the psychogenesis of 
jokes is discussed. The pleasure in the case of a 
tendentious joke arises from a purpose being satisfied 
whose satisfaction would otherwise not have taken 
place. The techniques of jokes are themselves sources of 
pleasure. In one group of jokes, the technique consists in 
focusing our psychical attitude upon the sound of the 
word instead of upon its meaning. A second group of 
technical methods used in jokes (unification, similarii y 
of sound, multiple use, modification of familiar phrases, 
allusions to quotations) has as the common character- 
istic thj fact that in each of them something familiar is 
rediscovered. This is the basis for the use of another 
technical resource in jokes, topicality. The third group 
of joke techniques for the most part conceptual jokes, 
which comprises faulty thinking, displacements, absurd- 
ity, representation by the opposite, etc., my at first 



glance seem to bear a special impress and to have no 
kinship with the techniques of rediscovery of what is 
familiar or the replacement of object associations by 
word associations. Nevertheless the theory of economy 
or relief in psychical expenditure applies here. The first 
and third of these groups, the replacement of thing 
associations by word associations and the use of absurd- 
ity, can be brought together as reestablishing old 
liberties and getting rid of the burden of intellectual 
upbringing; they are psvchical reliefs, which can be 
contrasted with the economizing which constitutes the 
technique of the second group. From these 2 principles 
all the techniques of jokes, and accordingly all pleasure 
from these techniques, are derived; relief from psychical 
expenditure that is already there and economizing in 
psychical expenditure that is only about to be called for. 

1905C 8/128 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
B. Synthetic part. IV. The mechanism of pleasure and 
the psychogenesis of jokes. (2). The purpose and 
functions of jokes. 

Before there is such a thing as a joke, there is 
something that we may describe as play or as a jest . Play 
with words and thoughts, motivated by certain pleasur- 
able effects of economy, are the first stages of jokes. 
This play is brought to an end by the strengthening of a 
factor described as the critical faculty or reasonableness. 
Next a second preliminary stage of jokes sets in, the jest. 
It is now a question of prolonging the yield of pleasure 
from play, but at the same time silencing the objections 
raised by criticism which would not allow the pleasur- 
able feeling to emerge. The psychogenesis of jokes 
reveals that the pleasure in a joke is derived from play 
with words or from the liberation of nonsense, and that 
the meaning of the joke is merely intended to protect 
that pleasure from being done away with by criticism. If 
what a jest says possesses substance and value, it turns 
into a joke. The tendentious jokes use the pleasure from 
jokes as a i ore-pleasure to produce new pleasure by 
lifting suppi „iOns and repressions. 

1905C 8/140 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
B. Synthetic part. V. The motives of jokes-Jokes as a 
social process. 

Jokes are discussed as a social process. Although the 
joke work is an excellent method of getting pleasure out 
of psychical processes, it is nevertheless evident that not 
everyone is equally capable of making use of that 
method. The impression is given that the subjective 
determinants of the joke work are often not far removed 
from those of neurotic illness. The great majority of 
jokes, and especially those that are constantly being 
newly produced in connection with the events of the 



56 



o 



65 



190SC 8/208 



day, are circulated anonymously. The motive force for 
the production of innocent jokes is not infrequently an 
ambitious urge to show one’s cleverness, to display 
oneself. In laughter, the conditions are present under 
which a sum of psychical eneigy which has hitherto been 
used for cathexis is allowed free discharge. Since 
laughter is an indication of pleasure, we shall be inclined 
to relate this pleasure to the lifting of the cathexis which 
has previously been present. If a quota of cathectic 
energy capable of discharge is to be liberated, there are 
several conditions which must be fulfilled or which are 
desirable in order to act as encouragement: 1) it must be 
ensured that the person is really making this cathectic 
expenditure; 2) it is necessary to guard against the 
cathectic expenditure, when it is liberated, finding some 
other psychical use instead of offering itself for motor 
discharge; and 3) it is an advantage if the cathexis which 
is to be liberated in the third person is intensified 
beforehand. 

190SC 8/159 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
C. Theoretic part. VI. The relation of jokes to dreams 
and to the unconscious. 

The relation of jokes to dreams and to the uncon- 
scious is discussed. Thought transformation with a view 
to the possibility of representation, condensation and 
displacement are the 3 major achievements that may be 
ascribed to the dream work. The characteristics and 
effects of jokes are linked with certain forms of 
expression or technical methods, among which the most 
striking are condensation, displacement, and indirect 
representation. Processes, however, which lead tc the 
same results have become known to us as peculiarities of 
the dream work. Jokes are formed as a preconscious 
thought is given over for a moment to unconscious 
revision and the outcome of this is at once grasped by 
conscious perception. The characteristics of jokes which 
can be referred to their formation in the unconscious are 
presented: i) the peculiar brevity of jokes; 2) displace- 
ments; 3) representation by the opposite; and 4) the use 
of nonsense. Dreams serve predominantly for the avoid- 
ance of unpleasure, jokes for the attainment of pleasure; 
but all our mental activities converge in these 2 aims. 

1905C 8/181 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
C. Theoretic part. Vll. Jokes and the species of the 
comic. (1). 

Jokes are a subspecies of the comic. The comic, 
which behaves differently socially from jokes; is con- 
cerned with 2 persons, (the first who finds what is comic 
and a second in whom it is found) while a third person 
intensifies, but doesn’t add to the comic process. A joke 
is made, the comic is found. The type of the comic 



which stands nearest to jokes is the naive. The comic 
arises as an unintended discovery derived from human 
social relations. It is found in people, in their move 
ments, forms, actions and traits of character, originally 
in all probability only in their physical characteristics 
but later in their mental ones as well or in the expression 
of those characteristics. Nonsense and stupidity, which 
so often produce a comic effect, are nevertheless not felt 
as comic in every case. The comic that is found in 
someone else’s intellectual and mental characteristics is 
the outcome of a comparison between him and self, 
though a comparison which has produced the opposite 
result to that in the case of a comic movement or action. 
A person appears comic to us if, in comparison with 
ourselves, he makes too great an expenditure on his 
bodily functions and too little on his mental ones. It can 
not be denied that in both these cases our laughter 
expresses a pleasurable sense of the superiority which we 
feel in relation to him. 

1905C 8/199 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (H05). 
C. Theoretic part. Vll. Jokes and the species of the 
comic. (2). Psychical location distinguishes jokes from 
the comic. 

It is possible to produce the comic in relation to 
oneself in order to amuse other people. To make other 
people comic, the principal means is to put them in 
situations in which a person becomes comic as a result of 
human dependence on external events, particularly on 
social factors, without regard to the personal character- 
istics of the individual concerned. This putting of 
someone in a real comic situation is called a practical 
joke. Other means of making things comic which deserve 
special consideration and also indicate fresh sources of 
comic pleasure include mimicry, caricature, parody, and 
travesty. Contact with the comic is not to be found in all 
jokes or even in the majority of them and, in most cases, 
a clear distinction is to be made between jokes and the 
comic. The pleasure in jokes is located in the uncon- 
scious while there is no justification for making the same 
localization in the case of the comic. Jokes and the 
comic are distinguished in their psychical localization: 
the joke is the contribution made to the comic from the 
realm of the unconscious. 

1905C 8/208 

Jckes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
C. Theoretic part. Vll. Jokes and the species of the 
comic. (3) & (4). Differences between jokes and comic. 

The comic of mimicry is permeated with caricature, 
the exaggeration of traits that are not otherwise striking, 
and also involves the characteristic of degradation. Jokes 
present a double face to their hearer, force him to adopt 
2 different views of them. In a nonsense joke, the one 



r' 



57 

66 



190SC 8/221 

view regards it as nonsense; the other view passes 
through the hearer’s unconscious and finds an excellent 
sense in it. Every theory of the comic is objected to by 
its critics on the score that its definition overlooks what 
is essential to the comic: The comic is based on a 
contrast between ideas. The most favorable condition 
for the production of comic pleasure Is a generally 
cheerful mood in which one is inclined to laugh. A 
similarly favorable effect is produced by an expectation 
of the comic, by being attuned to comic pleasure. 
Unfavorable conditions for the comic arise from the 
kind of mental activity with which a particular person is 
occupied at the moment. The opportunity for the 
release of comic pleasure disappears, too, if the attention 
is focused precisely on the comparison from which the 
comic may emerge . The comic is greatly interfered with 
if the situation from which it ought to develop gives rise 
at the same time to a release of strong affect. The 
generating of comic pleasure can be encouraged by any 
other pleasurable accompanying circumstance as though 
by some sort of contagious effect. 



1905C 8/221 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
C. Theoretic part. VII. Jokes and the species of the 
comic. (5), (6), (7), (8). Comic things are not proper in 
jokes; relation of humour to jokes. 

The comic of sexuality and obscenity are discussed 
using the starting point of exposure. A chance exposure 
has a comic effect on us because we compare the ease 
with which we have enjoyed the sight with the great 
expenditure which would otherwise be required for 
reaching this end. Every exposure of which we are made 
the spectator by a third person is equivalent to the 
exposed person being made comic. The comic difference 
is found either by a comparison between another person 
and oneself, or by a comparison entirely within the 
other person, or by a comparison entirely within oneself. 
The first case includes the comic of movement and form, 
of mental functioning and of character. The second case 
includes the most numerous possibilities, the comic of 
situation, of exaggeration, of mimicry, of degradation, 
and of unmasking. The comic of expectation, the third 
case is the remotest in children. The release of distressing 
affects is the greatest obstacle to the emergence of the 
comic. Humor is the most easily satisfied among the 
species of comic. It completes its course within a single 
person. An economy of pity is one of the most frequent 
sources of humourous pleasure. The pleasure in jokes 
arises from an economy in expenditure upon inhibition, 
the pleasure in the comic from an economy in expendi- 
ture upon ideation (upon cathexis) and the pleasure in 
humor from an economy in expenditure upon feeling. 



1905C 8/237 

Jokes and their relation to the unconscious (1905). 
Appendix: Franz Brentano’s riddles. 

In 1879 Franz Brentano published a booklet of some 
200 pages with the title New Riddles. This book included 
specimens of various different types of riddles, the last 
of which was described as fill-up riddles. According to 
him, this type of riddle was a favorite pastime in the 
Main region of Germany, but had only recently reached 
Vienna. The booklet includes 30 examples of the fill-up 
riddles, among them 2 that are quoted by Freud. These 
2 examples are presented along with the following 
English specimen: Burglars had broken into a large 
furrier’s store. But they were disturbed and went off 
without taking anything, though leaving the show room 
in the greatest confusion. When the manager arrived in 
the morning, he gave instructions to his assistants: 
“Never mind the cheaper goods. The urgent thing is to 
get the — .” inswer: ‘first rate furs straight.’ 



VOL. IX Jensen’s ‘Gradiva’ and Other Works 
(1906-1908) 

1907 A 9/3 

Delusions and dreams in Jensen’s Gradiva (1959). 
Editor’s note. 

Delusions and Dreams in Jensen’s Gradiva is Freud’s 
first published analysis of a work of literature, apart 
from his comments on Oedipus Rex and Hamlet in The 
Interpretation of Dreams. It was Jung who brought 
Jensen’s book to Freud’s notice, and Freud is reported 
to have written the present work especially to please 
Jung. This was in the summer of 1906, several months 
before the 2 men had met each other, and the episode 
was thus the herald of their 5 or 6 years of cordial 
relations. Apart from the deeper significance which 
Freud saw in Jensen’s work, there is no doubt that he 
must have been specially attracted by the scene in which 
it was laid. His interest in Pompeii was an old established 
one. In reading Freud’s study, it is worth bearing in 
mind its chronological place in his writings as one of his 
earliest psychoanalytic works. 

1907 A 9/7 

Delusions and dreams in Jensen’s Gradiva (1907). Part I. 
Synopsis of Jensen’s Gradiva. 

The story of Gradiva is summarized by Freud. A 
young archaeologist, Norbert Hanold, had discovered in 
a museum of antiquities in Rome a relief which attracted 
him. He obtained a plaster cast of it. The sculpture 



1907 A 9/87 



represented a fully grown girl stepping along, with her 
flowing dress a little pulled up so as to reveal her 
sandaled feet. The interest taken by the hero of the 
story in this relief is the basic psychological fact in the 
narrative. As an outcome of studies, he was forced to the 
conclusion that Gradiva’s gait was not discoverable in 
reality; and this filled him with regret and vexation. 
Soon afterwards he had a terrifying dream, in which he 
found himself in ancient Pompeii on the day of the 
eruption of Vesuvius and witnessed the city’s destruc- 
tion. Gradiva disappeared and the hero searched for her. 
She appeared to come to life in someone else’s body. 
Hanold met her, Zeo Bertgang, and they went away to- 
gether. With the triumph of love, what was beautiful and 
precious in the delusion found recognition as well. In his 
last simile, however, of the childhood friend who had 
been dug out of the ruins, Jensen presented the key to 
the symbolism of which the hero’s delusion made use in 
disguising his repressed memory. 

1907 A 9/41 

Delusions and dreams in Jensen’s Gradiva (1907). Part 

II. Gradiva and the psychology of the unconscious. 

In Gradiva Jensen presented a perfectly correct 
psychiatric study, upon which we may measure our un- 
derstanding of the workings of the mind, a case history 
and the history of a cure which might have been 
designed to emphasize certain fundamental theories of 
medical psychology. Norbert Hanold ’s condition is often 
spoken of as a delusion, and we have no reason to reject 
that designation. The state of permanently turning away 
from women produces a susceptibility or a predisposi- 
tion to the formation of a delusion. The development of 
the mental disorder sets in at the moment when a chance 
impression arouses the childhood experiences which 
have been forgotten and which have traces, at least, of 
an erotic coloring. Norbert Hanold’s memories of his 
childhood relations with the girl with the graceful gait 
were repressed. The first manifestations of the process 
that had been set going in Hanold by the relief that he 
saw were phantasies, which played around the figure 
represented in it. Norbert Hanold’s delusion was carried 
a step further by a dream which occurred in the middle 
of his efforts to discover a gait like Gradiva’s in the 
streets of the town where he lived. Hanold’s dream was 
an anxiety dream; its content was frightening; the 
dreamer felt anxiety while he slept and he was left with 
painful feelings afterwards. 

1907 A 9/64 

Delusions and Dreams in Jensen’s Gradiva (1907). Part 

III. Relations between dreams and delusions. 

The construction of the fresh delusion about 
Gradiva’s death during the destruction of Pompeii in the 



year 79 was not the only result of the first dream in Jen- 
sen’s Gradiva. Immediately after it, Hanold decided on his 
journey to Italy. The journey was undertaken for 
reasons which its subject did not recognize at first and 
only admitted to himself later, reasons described as un- 
conscious. The view of Hanold’s journey as a flight from 
his awakening erotic longing for the girl whom he loved 
and who was so close to him is the only one which will 
fit in with the description of his emotional states during 
his stay in Italy. The appearance of Zoe Bertgang marks 
the climax of tension in the story. This unusually clever 
girl was determined to win her childhood friend for her 
husband, after she had recognized that the young i.ian’s 
love for her was the motive force behind the delusion. If 
a patient believes in his delusion so firmly, it is not 
because his faculty of judgment has been overturned and 
does not arise from what is false in the delusion. On the 
contrary, there is a grain of truth concealed in every 
delusion, there is something in it that really deserves 
belief, and this is the source of the patient’s conviction, 
which is to that extent justified. Hanold’s second dream 
concerns the replacement of an elderly gentlemen by 
Gradiva and the introduction of an enigmatic female 
colleague. 

«907A 9/87 

Delusions and dreams in Jensen’s Gradiva (1907). Part 

IV. Treatment of the delusions in Gradiva. Postscript to 
the second edition (1912). 

Jensen has arbitrarily tacked a love story on to his 
archaeological phantasy. The beginnings of a change in 
Hanold were not shown only in his abandoning his 
delusion. Simultaneously, and before his delusion was 
cleared up, an unmistakable craving for love awakened in 
him, which found its outcome in his courting the girl 
who had freed him from his delusion. The procedure 
which Zoe adopts for curing her childhood friend’s 
delusion sgri-es with the therapeutic method, introduced 
by Breuer and Freud, called cathartic by Breuer and 
analytic by Freud. The similarity between Gradiva’s 
procedure and the analytic method of psychotherapy 
includes: the making conscious of what has been 
repressed, the coinciding of explanation with cure, and 
the awakening of feelings. The latent dream thoughts in 
Gradiva are day’s residues. But in order for a dream to 
develop out of them, the cooperation of a wish (usually 
an unconscious one) is required; this contributes the 
motive force for constructing the dream, while the day’s 
residues provide the material. The first was a wish to 
have been present as an eyewitness at the catastrophe in 
the year 79. The other wish was to be there when the 
girl he loved lay down to sleep. Two other stories by 
Jensen (The Red Parasol and In the Gothic House) were 
discussed in the postscript to the second edition. All 3 
stories treat the same theme: the development of a love 



1906C 9/99 



as an aftereffect of an intimate association in childhood 
of a brother and sister kind. 

1906C 9/99 

Psycho-analysis and the establishment of the facts in 
legal proceedings (1959). Editor’s note. 

Psychoanalysis and the Establishment of the Facts in 
Legal Proceedings was originally delivered in June 1906 
as a lecture. The lecture is of some historical interest, 
since it contains Freud’s first published mention of the 
name of Jung. Its whole purpose seemed to be to intro- 
duce the Zurich association experiments and the theory 
of complexes to Vienna students. Association experi- 
ments were first systematically made by Wundt, and 
later introduced into psychiatry by Krapelin and, more 
especially, Aschaffenburg. The Zurich findings were 
chiefly of interest for the stress they laid on the impor- 
tance of one particular factor in influencing the reac- 
tions. This factor was described as an emotionally 
colored ideational complex. This is explained as meaning 
the totality of ideas relating to a particular emotionally 
colored event. 



1906C 9/103 

Psycho-analysis and the establishment of the facts in 
legal proceedings (1906). 

There is a growing recognition of the untrust- 
worthiness of statements made by witnesses, on which 
many convictions are based in court cases. A new 
method of investigation, the aim of which is to compel 
the accused person himself to establish his own guilt or 
innocence by objective signs, is presented. The method 
consists of a psychological experiment and is based on 
psychological research. A word is called out to the sub- 
ject and he replies as quickly as possible with some other 
word that occurs to him, his choice of this reaction not 
being restricted by anything. The points to be observed 
are the time required for the reaction and the relation 
between the stimulus word and the reaction word. It has 
become customary to speak of an ideational content 
which is able to influence the reaction to the stimulus 
word, as a complex. This influence works either by the 
stimulus word touching the complex directly or by the 
complex succeeding in making a connection with the 
word through intermediate links. The following reac- 
tions to the stimulus word can be observed. The content 
of the reaction may be unusual. The reaction time may 
be prolonged. There may be a mistake in reproducing 
the reaction. The phenomenon of perseveration may 
occur. It was suggested that the legal profession adopt 
the experimental method presented by Freud in an 
effort to establish guilt or innocence by objective signs. 



1907B 9/115 

Obsessive actions and religious practices (1907). 

Obsessive Actions and Religious Practices was written 
in February 1907. This was Fieud’s introductory in- 
cursion into the psychology of religion. Freud was 
struck by the resemblance between obsessive actions in 
sufferers from nervous disorders and the observances by 
means of which believers give expression to their piety. 
People who carry out obsessive actions or ceremonials 
belong to the same class as those who suffer from obses- 
sive thinking, obsessive ideas, obsessive impulses, and the 
like. Neurotic ceremonials consist in making small 
adjustments to particular everyday actions, small addi- 
tions or restrictions or arrangements which have always 
to be carried out in the same, or in a methodically varied 
manner. Any activities may become obsessive actions if 
they are elaborated by small additions or given a 
rhythmic character. In obsessive actions everything has 
its meaning and can be interpreted. The same is true of 
ceremonials in the strict sense. A ceremonial starts as an 
action for defense or insurance, a protective measure. 
The sense of guilt of obsessional neurotics finds its 
counterpart in the protestations of pious people that 
they know at heart they are miserable sinners; and the 
pious observances with which such people preface every 
daily act, seem to have the value of defensive or protec- 
tive measures. Obsessional neurosis is regarded as a 
pathological counterpart of the formation of a religion. 
That neurosis is described as an individual religiosity and 
religion is described as a universal obsession. 

1907C 9/129 

The sexual enlightenment of children (1907) 

The Sexual Enlightenment of Children was written at 
the request of a Hamburg doctor, Dr. M. Furst, for 
publication in a periodical devoted to social medicine 
and hygiene of which he was the editor. It is commonly 
believed that the sexual instinct is absent in children and 
only begins to emerge in them at puberty when the 
sexual organs mature. This is a gross error, equally 
serious in its effects both on knowledge and on practice. 
The newborn baby brings sexuality with it into the 
world, certain sexual sensations accompany its develop- 
ment as a suckling and during early childhood, and only 
very few children would seem tc escape sexual activities 
and sensations before puberty. A child’s intellectual 
interest in the riddles of sex, his desire for sexual knowl- 
edge, shows itself at an unexpectedly early age. The 
question of the origin of babies also exercises a child’s 
mind. This is usually started by the unwelcome arrival of 
a small brother or sister. Freud does not think that there 
is a single good reason for denying children the en- 
lightenment which their thirst for knowledge demands. 
The child’s curiosity will never reach a very high degree 



69 



60 



1908D 9/177 



of intensity unless it finds appropriate satisfaction at 
each stage of his learning. Enlightenment about the 
specific facts of human sexuality and an indication of its 
social significance should, therefore, be given to the 
child at the end of his elementary school years and be- 
fore he enters his intermediate school, i.e., before he is 
10 years old. 

1908E 9/141 

Creative writers and day-dreaming (1908). 

Creative Writers and Day Dreaming was originally 
delivered as a lecture on December 6, 1907. Every child 
at play behaves like a creative writer in that he creates a 
world of his own or rearranges the things of his world in 
a new way which pleases him. The opposite of play is 
not what is serious but what is real. The creative writer 
does the same thing as the child at play : he creates a 
world of phantasy which he takes very seriously. As 
people grow up, they c lase to play, and they seem to 
give up the yield of pleasure which they gained from 
playing. The growing child, when he stops playing, gives 
up nothing but the link with real objects; instead of 
playing, he now phantasizes. People’s phantasies are less 
easy to observe than the play of children. The adult is 
ashamed of his phantasies and hides them from other 
people. A child’s play is determined by wishes: by a 
single wish, one that helps in his upbringing, the wish to 
be big and grow up. The motive forces of phantasies are 
unsatisfied wishes, and every phantasy is the fulfillment 
of a wish, a correction of unsatisfying reality. A strong 
experience in the present awakens in the creative writer 
a memory of an earlier experience from which there 
proceeds a wish which finds its fulfillment in the creative 
work. The work itself exhibits elements of the recent 
provoking occasion as well as of the old memory. 

1908A 9/157 

Hysterical phantasies and their relation to bisexuality 
(1908). 

Hysterical Phantasies and Their Relation to Bisexual- 
ity consists of a discussion of the relation between 
phantasies ana. symptoms. A common source and normal 
prototype of all the creations of phantasy is found in the 
day dreams of youth. They occur with equal frequency 
in both sexes. In girls and women, they are of an erotic 
nature; in men they may be either erotic or ambitious. A 
closer investigation of a man’s day dreams shows that all 
his heroic exploits are carried out and all his successes 
achieved in order to please a woman and to be preferred 
by her to other men. These phantasies are satisfactions 
of wishes proceeding from deprivation and longing. The 
day dreams are cathected with a large amount of 
interest. Unconscious phantasies have either been uncon- 
scious all dong and have been formed in the uncon- 



scious, or they were once conscious phantasies, day 
dreams, and have since been purposely forgotten and 
have become unconscious through repression. Uncon- 
scious phantasies are the immediate psychical precursors 
of a number of hysterical symptoms. The following 
characteristics of hysterical symptoms are presented: 
mnemic symbols, substitutes, an expression of the fulfill- 
ment of a wish, the realization of an unconscious 
phantasy. They serve the purpose of sexual satisfaction, 
correspond to a return of a mode of sexual satisfaction, 
arise as a compromise between 2 opposite affective and 
instinctual impulses, are never without a sexual sig- 
nificance , and are the expression of a masculine uncon- 
scious sexual phantasy and also a feminine one. The 
bisexual nature of hysterical symptoms is a confirmation 
of the view that the postulated existence of an innate 
bisexual disposition in man is clearly visible in the 
analysis of psychoneurotics. 



The relationship between character and anal eroticism 
is discussed. The people that Freud describes are note- 
worthy for a regular combination of the 3 following 
characteristics. They are especially orderly, parsi- 
monious, and obstinate. These people took a compara- 
tively long time to overcome their infantile fecal incon- 
tinence , and even in later childhood they suffered from 
isolated failures of this function. Anal erotism is one of 
the components of the sexual instinct which, in the 
course of development and in accordance with the 
education demanded by our present civilization, has 
become unserviceable for sexual aims. It is therefore 
plausible to suppose that these character traits of orderli- 
ness, parsimony, and obstinacy, which are so often 
prominent in people who were formerly anal erotics, are 
to be regarded as the first and most constant results of 
the sublimation of anal erotism. Freud theorizes that the 
permanent character traits are either unchanged prolon- 
gations of the original instincts, or sublimations of those 
instincts, or reaction formations against them. 

1908D 9/177 

‘Civilized’ sexual morality and modem nervous illness 
(1908). 

Civilized Sexual Morality and Modern Nervous Illness 
was the earliest of Freud’s full length discussions of the 
antagonism between civilization and instinctual life. It is 
not difficult to suppose that under the domination of a 
civilized sexual morality the health and efficiency of 
single individuals may be liable to impairment and that 
ultimately this injury, caused by the sacrifices imposed 
on them, may reach such a pitch that, by this indirect 
path, the cultural aim in view will be endangered as well. 



1908B 9/167 

Character and anal erotism (1908). 



61 



70 




/ 






I908C 9/20S 

The injurious influence of civilization reduces itself to 
the harmful suppression of the sexual life of civilized 
peoples through the ‘civilized’ sexual morality prevalent 
in them. Careful clinical observation allows us to 
distinguish 2 groups of nervous disorders: the neuroses 
and the psychoneuroses. In the former, the disturbances, 
whether they show their effects in somatic or mental 
functioning, appear to be of a toxic nature. The sexual 
factor is essential in the causation of the neurosis. With 
the psychoneuroses, the influence of heredity is more 
marked and the causation less transparent. Here the 
psychogenic symptoms of the psychoneuroses show a 
sexual content in their unconscious complexes. Gener- 
ally speaking, our civilization is built upon the sup- 
pression of instincts, in man, the sexual instinct does not 
originally serve the purposes of reproduction at all, but 
has as its aim the gaining of particular kinds of pleasure. 
Bearing in mind the evolution of the sexual instinct, 3 
stages of civilization can be distinguished: l)one in 
which the sexual instinct may be freely exercised with- 
out regard to the aims of reproduction; 2) one in which 
all of the sexual instinct is suppressed except what serves 
the aims of reproduction; (this includes discussion of 
perversions which do not serve this aim) and 3) one in 
which only legitimate reproduction (within marriage) is 
allowed as a sexual aim. This third stage is reflected in 
our present civilized sexual morality. The sexual be- 
havior of a human often lays down the pattern for all his 
other modes of reaction to life. The question is raised 
whether our civilized sexual morality is worth the 
sacrifice (neuroses) it imposes upon us. 

1908C 9/205 

On the sexual theories of children. 

On the Sexual Theories of Children presents the 
nol.'His of fertilization through the mouth, of birth 
through the anus, of parental intercourse as something 
sadistic, and of the possession of a penis by members of 
both sexes. The material is derived from several sources: 
the direct observation of what children say and do ; what 
adult neurotics consciously remember from their child- 
hood and relate during psychoanalytic treatment; and 
the inferences and constructions and the unconscious 
memories translated into conscious material, which 
result from the psychoanalysis of neurotics. The false 
sexual theories all contain a fragment of truth. Child- 
hood opinions about the nature or marriage, which are 
not seldom retained by conscious memory, have great 
significance for the symptomatology of later neurotic 
illness. 

1909 A 9/227 

Some general remarks on hysterical attacks (1909). 

When one carries out the psychoanalysis of a 
hysterical woman whose complaint is manifested in 



attacks, one soon becomes convinced that these attacks 
are nothing else but phantasies translated into the motor 
sphere, projected on to motility and protrayed in 
pantomime. A hysterical attack needs to be subjected to 
the same interpretive revision as that employed for night 
dreams. The attack becomes unintelligible since it repre- 
sents several phantasies in the same material simultane- 
ously. The attack becomes obscured because the patient 
attempts to carry out the activities of both the figures 
who appear in the phantasy through multiple identifica- 
tion. The onset of hysterical attacks follows certain laws. 
Since the repressed complex consists of a libidinal 
cathexis and an ideational content, the attack can be 
evoked associatively, organically, in the service of the 
primary purpose, or in the service of the secondary 
purposes. Investigation of the childhood history of 
hysterical patients shows that the hysterical attack is 
designed to take the place of an autoerotic satisfaction 
previously practiced and since given up. What points the 
way for the motor discharge of the repressed libido in a 
hysterical attack is the reflex mechanism of the act of 
coition, a mechanism which is ready to hand in every- 
body, including women, and which we see coming into 
manifest operation when an unrestrained surrender is 
made to sexual activity. 



1909C 9/235 

Family romance (1909). 

The psychology of the neuroses teaches us that, 
among other factors, the most intense impulses of sexual 
rivalry contribute to the feeling of being slighted. As a 
child grows up and tries to break away from the 
authority of his parents he regards this authority as 
hostility and responds by feeling that his own affection 
is not reciprocated fully. A boy has more hostile 
impulses towards his father than his mother. The next of 
later stages in the development of the neurotic’s 
estrangement from his parents is described as ‘the 
neurotic’s family romance.’ When the child comes to 
know the difference in the parts played by fathers and 
mothers in their sexual relations, the family romance 
undergoes a curious curtailment: it contents itself with 
exalting the child’s father, but no longer casts any doubt 
on his maternal origin. This second (sexual) stage of the 
family romance is actuated by another motive as well, 
which is absent in the first (asexual) stage. The cliild, 
having learned about sexual processes, tends to picture 
to himself erotic situations and relations, the motive 
force behind this being his desire to bring his mother 
into situations of secret infidelity and into secret love 
affairs. In this way the child’s phantasies, which started 
by being asexual, are brought up to the level of his later 
knowledge. The overvaluation that characterizes a child’s 
earliest years is evident in these phantasies. 



o 

ERLC 



62 



71 



1909B 10/3 



1907D 9/245 

Contribution to a questionnaire on reading (1907). 

Freud is asked to name 10 good books. The books 
that he names are: Multatuli, Letters and Works; 
Kipling, Jungle Book; Anatole France, Sur la pierre 
blanche ; Zola, Fecondite : Merezhkovsky, Leonardo da 
Vinci ; G. Keller, Leute von Seldwyla; C. F. Meyer, 
Huttens letzte Tage; Macaulay, Essays; Gomperz, 
Griechische Denker; and Mark Twain, Sketches. 

1907E 9/248 

Prospectus for Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunde 
(1907). 

The Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunde (Papers 
on Applied Mental Science) are aimed at that wider 
circle of educated people who, without actually being 
philosophers or medical men, are nevertheless able to 
appreciate the science of the human mind for its sig- 
nificance in the understanding and deepening of ou: 
lives. Each paper deals with a single subject. Collectively 
they will attempt to apply psychological knowledge to 
subjects in art and literature, in the history of civiliza- 
tions and religions, and in analogous fields. The series is 
open to the exponents of divergent opinions and hopes 
to be able to give expression to the variety of points of 
view and principles in contemporary science. 

1908F 9/250 

Preface to Wilhelm Stekel’s ‘Nervous anxiety-states and 
their treatment’ (1908). 

Freud’s investigations into the etiology and psychical 
mechanism of neurotic illnesses, which he pursued since 
1893, attracted little notice in the beginning among his 
fellow specialists. At length, however, those investiga- 
tions have met with recognition from a number of 
medical research workers and have also drawn attention 
to the psychoanalytic methods of examination and treat- 
ment. Dr. Wilhelm Stekel, who was one of the first of 
the colleagues to whom Freud was able to impart a 
knowledge of psychoanalysis, and who has himself 
become familiar with it » technique through many years 
of paractice, has now undertaker; the task of working 
over one topic in the clinical aspects of these neuroses 
on the basis of Freud’s views and of presenting medical 
readers with the experiences he has obtained through the 
psychoanalytic method. Dr. Stekel’s work is founded 
upon rich experience and is calculated to stimulate other 
physicians into confirming by their own efforts the 
views on the etiology of these conditions. 

1910B 9/252 

Preface to Sandor Ferenczi’s ‘Psycho-analysis: essays in 
the field of psycho-analysis’ (1910). 

Psychoanalytic research into the neuroses (the various 
forms of nervous illness with a mental causation) has 



endeavored to trace their connection with instinctual life 
and the restriction imposed on it by the claims of 
civilization, with the activities of the normal individual 
in phantasies and dreams, with the creations of the 
popular mind in religion, myths, and fairy tales. Sandor 
Ferenczi is familiar with all the difficulties of psycho- 
analytic problems and is the first Hungarian to under- 
take the task of creating an interest in psychoanalysis 
among doctors and men of education in his own country 
through writings composed in their mother tongue. 



1903 A 9/253 

1904B 

1904E 

Contnoutions to the ‘Neue Freie Presse’ (1903-1904). 

Three contributions to the Neue Freie Presse are 
presented. In the review of George Biedenkapp’s Im 
Kampfe Gegen Hirnbacillen, Freud states that concealed 
behind this somewhat unpromising title is the book of a 
brave man who succeeds in presenting much that is 
worthly of consideration. Biedenkapp is fighting against 
those, “little words and arrangements of words which 
exclude or include too much,” and which reveal, in 
people who have the habit of using them for preference, 
a tendency towards, “exclusive or superlative judg- 
ments.” The exhortation to moderation in judgment and 
expression serves the author only as a point of departure 
for further discussions on other errors of thought of 
human beings, on the central delusion, faith, on atheistic 
morality, etc. In a review of John Bigelow’s The Mystery 
of Sleep, Freud states that solving the mystery of sleep 
might well have been reserved to science; the author, 
however, operates with biblical arguments and tel- 
eological causes. Bigelow states that the important 
processes of unconscious mental and even intellectual 
activity continue even during profound sleep. The 
obituary of Professor S. Hammerschlag (a Jewish 
religious teacher) reveals him as one of those personal- 
ities who possess the gift of leaving ineradicable impres- 
sions on the development of their pupils. 



VOL. X The Cases of ‘Little Hans’ and the 
‘Rat Man’ (1909) 

1909B 10/3 

Analysis of a phobia in a five-year-old boy. Editor’s note 
(1955). Part I. Introduction (1909). 

The Analysis of a Phobia in a 5-Year-Old Boy de- 
scribes the course of the illness and recovery of a very 
youthful patient. The first reports of Hans date from a 



o 



63 

72 



1909B 10/22 



period when he was not quite 3 years old. At that time 
he was showing a quite peculiar lively interest in that 
portion of his body which he used to describe as his 
‘widdler.’ Around the age of 3} 4 he realized an essential 
characteristic for differentiating between animate and 
inanimate objects: the presence or absence of a widdler. 
His thirst for knowledge seemed to be inseparable from 
sexual curiosity and his curiosity was particularly di- 
rected towards his parents through his interest in the 
presence of his mother’s and father’s widdlers. At 354, 
Hans’ mother threatened him with castration because he 
was masturbating. The great event of Hans’ life was the 
birth of his little sister Hanna when he was exactly 354, 
He noticed and remarked on the smallness of her 
widdler. At 3 % he showed his first, but not his last trace 
of homosexuality. When he was 454, he made it clear 
that having his knickers unbuttoned and his penis taken 
out was pleasurable. When Hans was 454, he finally 
acknowledged the distinction between male and female 
genitals. 



1909B 10/22 

Analysis of a phobia in a five-year-old boy (1909). Part 
II. Case history and analysis of little Hans. 

The case history and analysis of Little Hans is 
presented. Hans, almost 5 years old, woke up one 
morning in tears. Asked why he was crying, he said to 
his mother that he thought she was gone. This is 
interpreted as an anxiety dream. The fundamental 
phenomenon in his condition was that his affection for 
his mother became enormously intensified. Hans relates 
a phantasy concerning a big giraffe and a crumpled 
giraffe. This is interpreted as the big giraffe (long neck) 
being his father’s penis and the crumpled one as his 
mother’s genital organ. Hans comes to his mother’s bed 
in the morning and is caressed by her, thus defying his 
father. Hans was afraid of big animals (especially horses) 
because big animals have big widdlers. His anxiety, 
which corresponded to a repressed erotic longing was,* 
like every infantile anxiety, without an object to begin 
with. After an attack of influenza, his phobia of horses 
increased so much that he could not be induced to go 
out. The immediate precipitating cause of his phobia was 
the fall of a big heavy horse; one of the interpretations 
of this impression seems to be that emphasized by his 
father, namely, that Hans at that moment perceived a 
wish that his father might fall down in the same way and 
be dead. Hans wished that his father would die and then 
he, Hans, would take his father’s place with his mother. 
The theme of Han’s sister Hanna is discussed in relation 
to his viewing her as being in a box (womb). 



1909B 10/101 

Analysis of a phobia in a five-year-old boy (1909). Part 
III. Discussion: I. 

The observation of the development and resolution of 
a phobia in a boy under 5 years of age is examined. It is 
possible that Hans was not normal, but a neurotic 
degenerate; however, Freud discounts this. Little Hans 
was described by his parents as a cheerful, straight- 
forward child. The first trait in Hans which can be 
regarded as part of his sexual life was a peculiar interest 
in his ‘widdler,’ This interest aroused in him the spirit of 
inquiry, and he thus discovered that the presence or 
absence of a widdler made it possible to differentiate 
between animate and inanimate objects. He assumed 
that all animate objects were like himself and possessed 
this important bodily organ; he observed that it was 
present in the larger animals, suspected that this was so 
too in both his parents, and was not deterred by the 
evidence of his own eyes from authenticating the fact in 
his newborn sister. In little Hans’ sexual constitution, 
the genital zone was from the outset the one among his 
erotogenic zones which afforded him the most intense 
pleasure. The most important influence upon the course 
of Hans’ psychosexual development was the birtn of a 
baby sister when he was 354 years old. That event 
accentuated his relations to his parents and gave him 
some insoluble problems to think about. In his 
triumphant final phantasy, he summed up all his erotic 
wishes, both those deri\»d from his autoerotic phase and 
those connected with his object love. Hans really was a 
little Oedipus who wanted to have his father out of the 
way so that he could sleep with his mother. In that 
phantasy he was married to his beautiful mother and had 
innumerable children whom he could look after in his 
own way. 



1909B 10/115 

Analysis of a phobia in a five-year-old-boy (1909). Part 
III. Discussion: 11. Little Hans case sheds light on 
phobias. 

The observation of the development and resolution of 
a phobia in a boy under 5 years of age is examined. One 
day while Hans was in the street he was seized with an 
attack of anxiety. Hans’s phobia soon ceased having any 
relation to the question of locomotion and became more 
and more clearly concentrated upon horses. In the early 
days of his illness, when the anxiety was at its highest 
pitch, he expressed a fear that a horse would come into 
his room. 'Die outbreak of the anxiety state was not as 
sudden as it appeared. A few days earlier the child had 
awakened from an anxiety dream to the effect that his 
mother had gone away. His parents represented to him 
that his anxiety was the result of masturbation, and 
encouraged him to break himself of the habit. Hans was 



64 







1909D 10/165 



not only afraid of horses biting him but also of carts, of 
furniture vans, and of buses, of horses that started 
moving, of horses that looked big and heavy, and of 
horses that drove quickly. The meaning of these specifi- 
cations was explained by Hans himself: he was afraid of 
horses falling down, and consequently incorporated in 
his phobia evt.y thing that seemed likely to facilitate 
their falling down. The falling horse represented not 
only his dying father but also his mother in childbirth. 
The birth of his sister aroused in Hans the question of 
birth and the idea that his father had something to do 
with it. The anxiety in this phobia is explained as being 
due to the repression of Hans’s aggressive propensities. 

1909B 10/141 

Analysis of a phobia in a five-year-old boy (1909). Part 
III. Discussion: HI. Little Hans case and childhood 
education. Postscript (1922). 

The observation of the development and resolution of 
a phobia in a boy under 5 years of age is examined. Hans 
was not a degenerate child. On the contrary, he was well 
formed physically, and was a cheerful, amiable, active- 
minded young fellow who might give pleasure to more 
people than his own father. He was not the only child 
who has been overtaken by phobia at some time or other 
in his childhood.. The only results of the analysis were 
that Hans recovered, that he ceased to be afraid of 
horses, and that he got on to rather familiar terms with 
Ids father. Analysis replaced the process of repression, 
which was an automatic and excessive one, by a 
temperate and purposeful control on the part of the 
highest agencies cf die mind. Freud claims that he would 
have ventured to give the child one remaining piece of 
enlightenment which his parents withheld from him. He 
would have confirmed his instinctive premonitions, by 
telling him of the existence of the vagina and of 
copulation, thus diminishing further his unsolved 
residue, and putting an end to his stream of questions. 
Freud was tempted to claim for this neurosis of 
childhood the significance of being a type and a model, 
and to suppose that the multiplicity of the phenomena 
of repression exhibited by neuroses and the abundance 
of their pathogenic material do not prevent their being 
derived from a very limited number of processes 
concerned with identical ideational complexes. 

1909D 10/153 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis. Editor’s note 
(1955) and Introduction (1909). 

Notes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis concerns a 
case, the treatment of which began on October 1, 1907. 
This case judged by its length, the injuriousness of its 
effects, and the patient’s own view of it, deserves to be 
classed as a moderately severe one. The treatment, which 



lasted for about a year, led to the complete restoration 
of the patient’s personality, and to the removal of his 
inhibitions. Persons suffering from a severe degree of 
obsessional neurosis present themselves far less fre- 
quently for analytic treatment than hysterical patients. 
Obsessional neurosis is not an easy thing to understand. 
Because we are less familiar with obsessional neurosis, 
we are less able to have expectations about it. 

1909D 10/158 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part I. 
Extracts from the case history: (A) The beginning of the 
treatment. (B) Infantile sexuality. 

Extracts from a case history of obsessional neurosis 
are presented. A youngish man of university education 
introduced himself with the statement that he had 
suffered from obsessions ever since his childhood, but 
with particular intensity for the last 4 years. The chief 
features of his disorder were fears that something might 
happen to 2 people of whom he was very fond, his 
father and a lady whom he admired. Besides this h<, was 
aware of compulsive impulses, such as an impulse to cut 
his throat with a razor; and further he produced 
prohibitions, sometimes in connection with quite un- 
important tilings. The beginning of the treatment in- 
volved a pledge on the part of the patient to say 
everything that came into his head, even if it was 
unpleasant to him, or seemed unimportant or irrelevant, 
or senseless. As a result of his statements, Freud 
discovered that the patient was under the domination of 
a component of the sexual instinct, the desire to look 
(scopophilia), as a result of which there was a constant 
recurrence in liim of a very intense wish connected with 
persons of the female sex who pleased him, the wish to 
see them naked. This wish corresponded to the later 
obsessional or compulsive idea. Side by side with the 
obsessive wish, and intimately associated with it, was an 
obsessive fear: every time he had a wish of this kind he 
could not help fearing that something dreadful would 
happen. Obsessional neuroses make it much more 
obvious than hysterias that the factors which go to form 
a psychoneurosis are to be found in the patient’s 
infantile sexual life and not in his present one. 

1909D 10/165 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part I. 
Extracts from the case history. (C) The great obsessive 
fear. 

Extracts from a case history of obsessional neurosis 
are presented. The patient revealed his great obsessive 
fear that some rats would bore their way into the anus 
of a lady whom he admired and also into the anus of his 
father. As his father had died many years previously, this 
obsessive fear was much more nonsensical even than the 
first, and accordingly the fear concerning his father was 



rr' 




65 

74 








1909D 10/173 

not confessed to for a little while longer. He had ordered 
a replacement pince nez which was sent to him through 
the mails. He felt that unless he paid the charge back 
directly to a particular person, (Lieutenant A) the rat 
would actually act upon the lady. He vowed to pay the 
money directly to that particular person. He stated this 
vow in such a way that the actual paymeni was made 
very difficult. In reality, he owed the money to no one 
but the official at the post office. The captain who had 
told him he owed Lieutenant A the money made a 
mistake which the patient must have known was a 
mistake. In spite of this the patient made his vow of 
payment founded upon the mistake. In so doing he 
suppressed the episode of the other Captain (B) and the 
trusting young lady at the post office. He was deter- 
mined to see a doctor and thought that a doctor would 
give him a certificate to the effect that it was necessary 
for him, in order to recover his health, to perform his 
particular obsessional actions. 

1909D 10/173 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part I. 
Extracts from the case history. (D) Initiation into the 
nature of the treatment. 

Extracts from a case history of obsessional neurosis 
are presented. Nine years previously the patient’s father 
had died one evening, when the patient v/as not there, 
and the son had felt guilty ever since. Freud helped him 
to conclude that he actually wished for the death of his 
father. The patient confessed that from the age of 7, he 
had had a fear that his parents guessed his thoughts, and 
this fear had persisted all his life. When he was 12 he felt 
that if his father died his death might make him rich 
enough to marry a girl he loved. During the seventh 
session, he said that he could not believe that he had 
ever entertained such a wish against his father. He went 
on to state that his illness had become so enormously 
intensified since his father’s death; and Freud said that 
he agreed with him in so far as he regarded his sorrow at 
his father’s death as the chief source of the intensity of 
his illness. His sorrow had found a pathological expres- 
sion in his illness. Whereas a normal period of mourning 
would last from 1 to 2 years, a pathological one like this 
would last indefinitely. 

1909D 10/186 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part I. 
Extracts from the case history. (E)Some obsessional 
ideas and their explanation. 

Extracts from a case history of obsessional neurosis 
are presented. Obsessional ideas have an appearance of 
being either without motive or without meaning, just as 
dreams have. The wildest and most eccentric obsessional 
ideas can be cleared up if they are investigated deeply 
enough. The solution is effected by bringing the obses- 



sional ideas into temporal relationship with the patient’s 
experiences, that is to say, by enquiring when a 
particular obsessional idea made its first appearance and 
in what external circumstances it is apt to recur. One of 
the suicidal impulses which appeared frequently in the 
patient was explained. It was related to the absence of 
his lady because she was taking care of her mother. He 
wanted to kill her mother for depriving him of his lady, 
and suicide was the way to punish himself for these 
thoughts. His obsession for protecting can only have 
been a reaction, as an expression of remorse and 
penitence, to a contrary, that is a hostile, impulse which 
he must have felt towards his lady. His obsession for 
counting during the thunderstorm can be interpreted as 
having been a defensive measure against fears that some- 
one was in danger of death. 

1909D 10/195 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part I. 
Extracts from the case history. (F)The precipitating 
cause of the illness. 

Extracts from a case history of obsessional neurosis 
are presented and the precipitating cause of the illness 
discussed. The infantile precondition of obsessional 
neurosis may be overtaken by amnesia, though this is 
often an incomplete one; but the immediate occasions of 
the illness are, on the contrary, retained in the memory. 
Repression makes use of another, and in reality a 
simpler, mechanism. The trauma, instead of being 
forgotten, is deprived of its affective cathexis so that 
what remains in consciousness is nothing but its idea- 
tional content, which is perfectly colorless and is judged 
to be unimportant. The distinction between what occurs 
in hysteria and in an obsessional neurosis lies in the 
psychological processes which we can reconstruct behind 
the phenomenon. The chief result of his illness was an 
obstinate incapacity for work, which allowed him to 
postpone the completion of his education for years. A 
conflict was stirred in him as to whether he should 
remain faithful to the lady he loved in spite of her 
poverty, or whether he should follow in his father’s 
footsteps and marry the lovely, rich, and well-connected 
girl who had been assigned to him. By falling ill he 
avoided the task of resolving the conflict in real life. 

1909D 10/200 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part I. 
Extracts from the case history. (G)The father complex 
and the solution of the rat idea. 

Extracts from a case history of obsessional neurosis 
about rats are presented. The patient found himself in a 
situation similar to that in which, as he knew or 
suspected, his father had been before his marriage; and 
the patient was thus able to identify himself with his 
father. The conflict at the root of his illness was a 



66 






1909D 10/237 



struggle between the persisting influence of his father’s 
wishes and his own amatory predilections. Freud put 
forward a construction that, when the patient was a 
child of under 6 he had been guilty of some sexual 
misdemeanor connected with masturbation and had 
been soundly castigated for it by his father. This 
punishment put an end to his masturbating, but left 
behind it a grudge against his father and had established 
him in his role of an interferer with the patient’s sexual 
enjoyment. The patient’s mother said that he was 
punished because he had bitten someone. The story of 
the rat punishrnent (a rat boring its way into the anus of 
his lady and his father), provoked all his suppressed 
cruel, egoistic and sexual impulses. The rat punishment 
evoked anal eroticism, which played an important part 
in his childhood and had been kept in activity for many 
years by a constant irritation due to worms. In this way 
rats came to have the meaning of money (Rattus is the 
genus for rat and Rate is German for installment). The 
relation of some sexual theories of children to this 
obsession is presented. 

1909D 10/221 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part 
II. Theoretical section. (A) Some general characteristics 
of obsessional structures. 

Some general characteristics of obsessional structures 
are discussed. Obsessional structures can be classed as 
wishes, temptations, impulses, reflections, doubts, com- 
mands, or prohibitions. During the secondary defensive 
struggle, which the patient carries on * against the 
obsessional ideas that have forced their way into his 
consciousness, psychical structures make their appear- 
ance which deserve to be given a special name. They are 
not purely reasonable considerations arising in opposi- 
tion to the obsessional thoughts, but, as it were, hybrids 
between the 2 species of thinking. They accept certain 
of the premises of the obsession they are combating, and 
thus, while using the weapons of reason, are established 
upon a basis of pathological thought. The patients 
themselves do not know the wording of their own 
obsessional ideas. Obsessional thoughts have undergone a 
distortion similar to that undergone by dream thoughts 
before they become the manifest content of a dream. 
The technique of distortion by ellipsis seems to be 
typical of obsessional neuroses. 

1909D 10/229 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part 
II. Theoretical section. (B)Some psychological pecul- 
iarities of obsessional neurotics: Their attitude towards 
reality, superstition and death. 

Seme psychological peculiarities of obsessional 
neurotics are discussed, especially their attitude towards 



reality, superstition, and death. The patient was highly 
superstitious, although he was a well educated and 
enlightened man of considerable acumen, and although 
he was able at times to assure Freud that he did not 
believe a word of all this rubbish. His superstition was 
that of an educated man, and he avoided such prejudices 
as being afraid of Friday or of the number 13, and so on. 
But he believed in premonitions and in prophetic 
dreams. He would constantly meet the very person of 
whom, for some inexplicable reason, he had just been 
thinking. Another mental need which is shared by 
obsessional neurotics is the need for uncertainty, or for 
doubt in their life. The creation of uncertainty which is 
among the objects of every psychoneurotic disorder, is 
one of the methods employed by the neurosis for 
drawing the patient away from reality and isolating him 
from the world. In obsessional neuroses, the uncertainty 
of memory is used to the fullest extent as a help in the 
formation of symptoms. The patient had a quite peculiar 
attitude towards the question of death. He showed the 
deepest sympathy whenever anyone died. In his imagi- 
nation he was constantly making away with people so as 
to show his heartfelt sympathy for their bereaved 
relatives. In every conflict which enters their lives they 
are on the lookout for the death of someone who is of 
importance to them. 



1909D 10/237 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part 
II. Theoretical section. (C) The instinctual life of obses- 
sional neurotics, and the origins of compulsion and 
doubt. 

The instinctual life of obsessional neurotics and the 
origins of compulsion and doubt arc discussed. The 
patient fell ill when he was in his twenties, on being 
faced with a temptation to marry another woman 
instead of the one whom he had loved so long, and he 
avoided a decision of this conflict by postponing all the 
necessary preliminary actions. The means for doing this 
was given him by his neurosis. If we consider a number 
of analyses of obsessional neurotics, we shall find it 
impossible to escape the impression that a relation 
between love and hatred such as we have found in our 
present patient is among the most frequent, the most 
marked, and probably, therefore, the most important 
characteristic of obsessional neurosis. It is doubt that 
leads the patient to uncertainty about his protective 
measures and to his continual repetition of them in 
order to banish that uncertainty. It is this doubt, too, 
that eventually brings it about that the patient’s pro- 
tective acts themselves become as impossible to carry 
out as his original inhibited decision in connection with 
his love. The compulsion is an attempt at a compensa- 
tion for the doubt and at a correction of the intolerable 



67 




« 



1955A 10/251 

conditions of inhibition to which the doubt hears 
witness. By a sort of regression, preparatory acts become 
substituted for the final decision, thinking replaces 
acting, and, instead of the substitutive act, some thought 
preliminary to it asserts itself with all the force of 
compulsion. An obsessive or compulsive thought is one 
whose function it is to represent an act regressively. 



1955A 10/251 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part 
II. Theoretical section. Addendum: Original record of 
the case: Editor’s note (1955). 

It was Freud’s practice throughout his life, after one 
of his works had appeared in print, to destroy all the 
material on which the publication was based. It is 
accordingly true that extremely few of the original 
manuscripts of his works have survived, still less the 
preliminary notes and records from which they were 
derived. The present record, A Case of Obsessional 
Neurosis, provides an unexplained exception to this rule, 
having been found among Freud’s papers in London 
after his death. Approximately the first third of the 
original record was reproduced by Freud almost 
verbatim in the published version. This covers the 
preliminary interview on October 1, 1907, and the first 
7 sessions. The second two-thirds of Freud’s record are 
translated in full. It contains some material taken up by 
Freud into the published case history, but a large 
proportion is new material. 



1955A 10/259 

Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis (1909). Part 
II. Theoretical section. Original record of the case. 

The original record of the case of the ‘Rat Man’ is 
produced. On October 10, the patient announced that 
he wanted to talk about the beginning of his obsessional 
ideas. An account of the visits proceeds through January 
20, when the manuscript ends. The patient’s resistances 
are discussed and his many dreams are interpreted to and 
for him. His masturbation and his lack of masturbation 
are discussed and the role that his father had in this 
situation is discussed. The connection between rats, 
worms, and penis is explained. The patient had had a 
great deal of annoyance over money matters with his 
friends and did not like it if analysis was diverted toward 
money matters. Rats have a special connection with 
money. 



VOL. XI Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, 
Leonardo and Other Works (1910) 

1910A 11/3 

Five lectures on psycho-analysis. Editor’s note (1957). 

In 1909, Clark University, Worcester, Massachusetts, 
celebrated the twentieth year of its foundation and its 
President, Dr. G. Stanley Hall, invited Freud and some 
of his principal followers io take part in the occasion 
and to be awarded honorary degrees. Freud’s 5 lectures 
were delivered on Monday, September 6, 1909, and the 
4 following days. The lectures were, according to 
Freud’s almost universal practice, delivered extempore 
without notes, and after very little preparation. It was 
only after his return to Vienna that he was induced 
unwillingly to write them out. All through his career 
Freud was constantly ready to give exposition of his 
discoveries. In spite of all the additions that were to be 
made to the structure of psychoanalysis during the 
following quarter of a century, these lectures provide an 
admirable preliminary picture which calls for very little 
correction. They give an excellent idea of the ease and 
clarity of style and the unconstrained sense of form 
which made Freud such a remarkable expository lec- 
turer. 

1910A 11/9 

Five lectures on psycho-analysis (1910). First lecture. 
Symptoms have psychological meaning. 

Dr. Josef Breuer first used the procedure of psy- 
choanalysis on a 21 -year-old girl who was suffering from 
hysteria. Her illness lasted for over 2 years, and in the 
course of it she developed a series of physical and 
psychological disturbances which deserved to be taken 
seriously. She suffered from a rigid paralysis, accom- 
panied by loss of sensation of both extremities on the 
right side of her body; and the same trouble from time 
to time affected her on the left side. It was observed 
that, while the patient was in her states of absence 
(altered personality accompanied by confusion), she was 
in the habit of muttering words to herself. Breuer put 
her into a type of hypnosis and repeated the muttered 
words to her so as to induce her to use them as a starting 
point. Her mental creations during the absences were 
melancholy phantasies. It was possible to bring about 
the disappearance of the painful symptoms of her illness, 
if she could remember, with an accompanying expres- 
sion of affect, on what occasion and in what connection 
the symptoms had first appeared. Hysterical patients 
suffer from reminiscences and their symptoms are 
residues and mnemic symbols of particular (traumatir) 
experiences. Breuer’s patient, in almost all her path- 
ogenic situations, was obliged to suppress a powerful 



68 



0 



77 



1910A 11/49 



emotion instead of allowing its discharge in the appro- 
priate signs of emotion, words or actions. She exhibited 
a number of mental peculiarities: Conditions of absence, 
confusion, and alterations of character. 

191 OA 11/21 

Five lectures on psycho-analysis (1910). Second lecture. 
Repression and symptom formation. 

At about the same time at which Breuer was carrying 
on the ’talking cure* with his patient, Charcot in Paris 
had begun the researches into hysterical patients at the 
Salpetriere. Pierre Janet first attempted a deeper ap- 
proach to the peculiar psychical processes present in 
hysteria. According to him, hysteria is a form of 
degenerate modification of the nervous system, which 
shows itself in an innate weakness in the power of 
psychical synthesis. Without using hypnosis, Freud 
succeeded in obtaining from the patients whatever was 
required for establishing the connection between the 
pathogenic scenes they had forgotten and the symptoms 
left over from those scenes. The memories were in the 
patient’s possession and were ready to emerge in asso- 
ciation to what was still known by him; but there was 
soro" force that prevented them from becoming con- 
scious and compelled them to remain unconscious. The 
force which was maintaining the pathological condition 
became apparent in the form of resistance on the part of 
the patient. It was on this idea of resistance that Freud 
based his view of the course of psychic?l events in 
hysteria. The investigation of hysterical patients and of 
other neurotics leads to the conclusion that their 
repression of the idea to which the intolerable wish L 
attached has been a failure. It is true that they have 
driven it out of consciousness and out of memory and 
have apparently saved themselves a large amount of 
unpleasure. But the repressed wishful impulse continues 
to exist in the unconscious. 

1910A 11/29 

Five lectures on psycho-analysis (1910). Third lecture. 
Psychic determinism, dreams, and parapraxes. 

Fnuu cherished a high opinion of the strictness with 
which mental processes are determined, and found it 
impossible to believe that an idea produced by a partient 
while his attention was focused could be an arbitrary 
one and unrelated to the idea being sought. The fact that 
the 2 ideas were not identical could be satisfactorily 
explained from the postulated psychological state of 
affairs. In the patient under treatment, 2 forces were in 
operation against each other: on the one hand, his 
conscious endeavor to bring into consciousness the 
forgotten idea in his unconscious; and, on the other 
hand, the resistance which was striving to prevent what 
was repressed or its derivatives from becoming con- 
scious. It is highly convenient to follow the Zurich 



school (Bleuler, Jung, etc.) in describing a group of 
interdependent ideational elements cathected with affect 
as a complex. If, in the search for a repressed complex in 
one of the patients, we start from the last thing he 
remembers, we have every prospect of discovering the 
complex, provided that the patient puts a sufficient 
number of his free associations at our disposal. Working 
over the ideas that occur to patients when they submit 
to the main rule of psychoanalysis is not the only 
technical method of discovering the unconscious. The 
same purpose is served by 2 other procedures: the 
interpretation of patients’ dreams and the exploitation 
of their faulty and haphazard actions. Psychoanalysis is 
seeking to bring to conscious recognition the things in 
mental life which are repressed. 

191 OA 11/40 

Five lectures on psycho-analysis (1910). Fourth lecture. 
Infantile sexuality and neurosis. 

Psychoanalytic research, which consistently traces 
back the symptoms of patients’ illnesses to impressions 
from their erotic life, shows that the pathogenic wishful 
impulses are in the nature of erotic instinctual com- 
ponents. It forces us to suppose that among the 
influences leading to the illness, the predominant signif- 
icance must be assigned to erotic disturbances; this is the 
case in both sexes. It is the experiences in childhood that 
explain susceptibility to later traumas and it is only by 
uncovering these forgotten memory traces and by 
making them conscious that we acquire the power to get 
rid of the symptoms. These powerful wishful impulses of 
childhood are described as sexual. The chief source of 
infantile sexual pleasure is the appropriate excitation of 
certain parts of the body that are especially susceptible 
to stimulus: apart from the genitals, these are the oral, 
anal and urethral orifices, as well as the skin and other 
sensory surfaces. Satisfaction, termed autoeroticism, is 
obtained from the subject’s own body. Thumsucking (or 
sensual sucking) is a good example of autoerotic 
satisfaction from an erotogenic zone. Direct inhibitions 
in the development of the sexual function comprise the 
perversions and general infantilism in sexual life. An 
instinct which remains independent leads to a perver- 
sion, and may substitute its own sexual aim for the 
normal one. The predisposition to neurosis is also 
traceable to impaired sexual development. 

1910A 11/49 

Five lectures on psycho-analysis (1910). Fifth lecture. 
Transference and resistance. 

Human beings fall ill when, as a result of external 
obstacles or of an internal lack of adaptation, the 
satisfaction of their erotic needs in reality is frustrated. 
They take flight into illness in order that they may find 
a satisfaction to take the place of what has been 




69 



1910C 11/59 



frustrated. The pathological symptoms constitute a 
portion of the subject’s sexual activity or even the whole 
of his sexual life; the withdrawal from reality is the main 
purpose of the illness but also the main damage caused 
by it. Resistance to recovery is compounded of several 
motives. The flight from unsatisfactory reality into 
illness takes place along the path of involution, of 
regression, of a return to earlier phases of sexual life. In 
every psychoanalytic treatment of a neurotic patient the 
strange phenomenon that is known as transference 
makes its appearance. The patient directs towards the 
physician a degree of affectionate feeling which is based 
on no real relation between them and which can only be 
traced bark to old wishful phantasies of the patient’s 
which have become unconscious. What becomes of the 
unconscious wishes which have been set free by psy- 
choanalysis can take several paths. First, the wishes can 
be destroyed by the rational mental activity of the 
better impulses that are opposed to them. A second 
outcome is that it then becomes posable for the 
unconscious instincts revealed by it to be employed for 
the useful purposes which they would have found earlier 
if the development had not been interrupted. A third 
possible outcome is the individual’s own happiness. 

1910C 11/59 

Leonardo da Vinci and a memory of his childhood. 
Editor’s note (195/). 

Freud’s interest in Leonardo da Vinci is of long 
standing. The immediate stimulus to writing Leonardo 
da Vinci and a Memory of his Childhood appears to have 
come in the autumn of 1909 from one of his patients 
who, as he remarked in a letter to Jung, seemed to have 
the same constitution as Leonardo without his genius. 
This work of Freud’s was not the first application of the 
methods of clinical psychoanalysis to the lives of 
historical figures in the past. The main body of Freud’s 
study consists of the detailed construction of Leonardo’s 
emotional life from his earliest years, the account of the 
conflict between his artistic and his scientific impulses, 
the deep analysis of his psychosexual history. In 
addition to this main topic, the study presents us with a 
number of not less important side themes: a more 
general discussion of the nature and workings of the 
mind of the creative artist, an outline of the genesis of 
one particular type of homosexuality, and the first full 
emergence of the concept of narcissism. 

191 OC 11/63 

Leonardo da Vinci and a memory of his childhood 
(1910). Part I. Biographical material. 

Leonardo da Vinci (1452 to 1519) was admired even 
by his contemporaries as one of the greatest men of the 
Italian renaissance. It is possible that the idea of a 
radiantly happy and pleasure-loving Leonardo is only 

70 



applicable to the first and longer period of the artist’s 
life. Afterwards, when he was forced to leave Milan, 
until he found his last asylum in France, the sparkle of 
his temperament may have grown dim and some strange 
sides of his nature may have been thrown into pro- 
minence. The slowness with which Leonardo worked 
was proverbial. The slowness which had all along been 
conspicuous in Leonardo’s work is seen to be a symptom 
of his inhibition and to be the forerunner of his 
subsequent withdrawal from painting. Leonardo was 
notable for his quiet peaceableness and his avoidance of 
all antagonism and controversy. In an age which saw a 
struggle between sensuality without restraint and 
gloomy asceticism, Leonardo represented the cool 
repudiation of sexuality, a thing that would scarcely be 
expected of an artist and a portrayer of feminine beauty. 
When he became a Master, he surrounded himself with 
handsome boys and youths whom he took as pupils. The 
core of his nature, and the secret of it, would appear to 
be that after liis curiosity had been activated in infancy 
in the service of sexual interest he succeeded in 
sublimating the greater part of his libido into an urge for 
research. 

1910C 11/82 

Leonardo da Vinci and a memory of his childhood 
(1910). Part II. Leonardo’s childhood memory. 

One of Leonardo’s childhood memories concerns a 
vulture that came down while Leonardo was in his 
cradle, opened his mouth with its tail, and struck him 
many times with its tail against his lips. This scene with 
the vulture is not a memory of Leonardo’s but a 
phantasy, which he formed at a later date and trans- 
posed to his childhood. This is often the way in which 
childhood memories originate. What the phantasy con- 
ceals is merely a reminiscence of suckling, or being 
suckled, at his mother’s breast, a scene of human beauty 
that he, like so many artists, undertook to depict with 
his brush in the guise of the mother of god and her child. 
The reminiscence has been transformed by the man 
Leonardo into a passive homosexual phantasy. The 
replacement of his mother by the vulture indicates that 
the child was aware of his father’s absence and found 
himself alone with his mother. The fact of Leonardo’s 
illegitimate birth is in harmony with his vulture 
phantasy; it was only on this account that he could 
compare himself to a vulture child. 

1910C 11/93 

Leonardo da Vinci and a memory of his childhood 
(1910). Part III. Sexual interpretation of Leonardo’s 
chfldhood memory. 

There is a strong presumption that Leonardo da 
Vinci, who had phantasies of a vulture was a homo- 
sexual. In this phantasy a mother who suckles her child 



79 






1910C 11/130 



is turned into a vulture and her breast into a vulture’s 
tail which signifies a penis. He appears as a man whose 
sexual need and activity were exceptionally reduced, as 
if a higher aspiration had raised him above the common 
animal need of mankind. It has always been emphasized 
that he took only strikingly handsome boys and youths 
as pupils, treated them with kindness and consideration, 
looked after them and, when they were ill, nursed them 
himself. Leonardo’s mother came to Milan in 1493 to 
visit her son; she fell ill there, was taken to the hospital 
by Leonardo, and when she died was honored by him 
with a costly funeral. A comparison with what happens 
in obsessional neurosis can explain Leonard’s account 
of the expenses of his mother’s funeral. In his uncon- 
scious he was still tied to her by erotically colored 
feeling, as he had been in childhood. Before a child 
comes under the dominance of a castration complex, at 
a time when he still holds women at full value, he begins 
to display an intense desire to look, as an erotic 
instinctual activity. It was through Leonardo’s erotic 
relation with his mother that he became a homosexual. 
The opposition that came from the subsequent 
repression of this childhood love did not allow him to 
set up a different and worthier memorial to her in his 
diary. But what emerged as a compromise from this 
neurotic conflict had to be carried out; and thus it was 
that the financial account was entered in the diary, and 
has come to the knowledge of posterity as something 
unintelligible. 

191 0C 11/107 

Leonardo da Vinci and a memory of his childhood 
(1910). Part IV. The blissful smiles in Leonardo’s 
paintings. 

Leonardo’s vulture phantasy is compounded from the 
memory of being suckled and being kissed by his 
mother. The idea that 2 distinct elements are combined 
in Mona Lisa’s smile is one that has struck several crities. 
They accordingly find in the beautiful Florentine’s 
expression the most perfect representation of the con- 
trasts which dominate the erotic life of women; the 
contrast between reserve and seduction, and between the 
most devoted tenderness and a sensuality that is ruth- 
lessly demanding. Leonardo da Vinci spent 4 years 
painting at this picture which contains the synthesis of 
the history of his childhood; its details are to be 
explained by reference to the most personal impressions 
in Leonardo’s life. In his father’s house he found not 
only his kind stepmother, Donna Albiera, but also his 
grandmother, his father’s mother, Monna Lucia, who 
was no less tender to him than grandmothers usually are. 
If Leonardo was successful in reproducing on Mona 
Lisa’s face the double meaning which this smile con- 
tained, the promise of unbounded tenderness and at the 
same time sinister menace, then here too he had 



remained true to the content of his earliest memory. For 
this mother’s tenderness was fateful for him; it deter- 
mined his destiny and the privations that were in store 
for him. The violence of the caresses, to which his 
phantasy of the vulture points, was only too natural. 

1910C 11/119 

Leonardo da Vinci and a memory of his childhood 
(1910). Part V. Effects of father-loss on Leonardo. 

Among the entries in Leonardo’s notebooks there is 
one which catches the reader’s attention owing to the 
importance of what it contains and to a minute formal 
error. The note refers to the death of Leonardo’s father. 
The small error consists of the repetition of the time of 
day (at 7 o’clock), which is given twice, as if Leonardo 
had forgotten at the end of the sentence that he had 
already written it at the beginning. This type of 
repetition is called perseveration and indicates affective 
color. The note is a case in which Leonardo was 
unsuccessful in suppressing his affect. The effect which 
Leonardo’s identification with his father had on his 
paintings was a fateful one. He created them and then 
cared no more about them. Psychoanalysis has shown 
that there is a connection between the father complex 
and belief in God. Leonardo was charged with unbelief 
or with apostqsy from Christianity during his lifetime. 
The great Leonardo remained like a child for the whole 
of his life. Even as an adult he continued to play, and 
this was one of the reasons why he often appeared 
uncanny and incomprehensible to his contemporaries. 
Whenever children feel their sexual urges, they dream of 
fulfilling their wishes through flying. Leonardo admits 
that he has always felt bound to the problem of flight. It 
is probable that Leonard’s play instinct vanished in his 
mature years; but its long duration can teach us how 
slowly anyone tears himself from Ills childhood if in his 
childhood days he has enjoyed the highest erotic bliss, 
which is never again attained. 

1910C 11/130 

Leonardo da Vinci and a memory of his childhood 
(1910). Part VI. Justification of pathobiography. 

Freud insists that he never reckoned Leonardo da 
Vinci as a neurotic. The aim of the work has been to 
explain the inhibitions in Leonardo’s sexual life and in 
his artistic activity. His illegitimate birth deprived him of 
his father’s influence until perhaps his fifth year, and left 
him open to the tender seductions of a mother whose 
only solace he was. A powerful wave of repression 
brought his childhood excess to an end and established 
the dispositions which were to become manifest in the 
years of puberty. The most obvious result of the 
transformation was the avoidance of every crudely 
sensual activity; Leonardo was enabled to live in 
abstinence and to give the impression of being an asexual 



o 



ERIC 

MMMiriiima 



455-582 O - 72 - G 



71 




1910D 11/139 



human being. Leonardo emerges from the obscurity of 
Ids boyhood as an artist, a painter and a sculptor. It 
seems as if only a man who had had Leonardo’s 
childhood experiences could have painted the Mona Lisa 
and the St. Anne. 

1910D 11/139 

The future prospects of psycho-analytic therapy (1910). 

The Future Prospects of Psychoanalytic Therapy was 
delivered as an address at the opening of the Second 
Psychoanalytical Congress, held at Nuremberg on March 
30 and 31, 1910. We have not come to the end of our 
resources for combating the neuroses but can soon 
expect a substantial improvement in therapeutic pro- 
spects. This reinforcement will come from 3 directions: 
1) from internal progress including advances in analytic 
knowledge and in technique; 2) from increased author- 
ity; and 3) from the general effect of psycho-analytic 
work. Every advance in knowledge means an increase in 
therapeutic power. The treatment is made up of 2 parts: 
what the physician infers and tells the patient, and the 
patient’s working over of what he has heard. New things 
are to be learned in the field of symbolism in dreams and 
in the unconscious. Technique has changed from the 
cathartic treatment to uncovering the complexes. 
Authority is necessary since only very few civilized 
people are capable of existing without reliance on others 
or are even capable of coming to an independent 
opinion. The general effect of the work will hopefully 
result in a Utopian-like community. All the energies 
which are consumed in the production of neurotic 
symptoms serving the purposes of a world of phantasy 
isolated from reality will help to strengthen the clamor 
for the changes in our civilization through which we can 
look for the well-being of future generations. 

1910E 11/153 

The antithetical meaning of primal words (191 0). 

The Antithetical Meaning of Primal Words is a review 
of the pamphlet by Karl Abel, bearing the same title. 
The dream interpreters of antiquity nave made use of 
the notion that a thing in a dream can mean its opposite. 
The dream work disregards negation and employs the 
same means of representation for expressing contraries. 
The behavior of the dream work is identical with a 
peculiarity in the oldest languages known to \»s. In the 
Egyptian language, there are a number of words with 2 
meanings, one of which is the exact opposite of the 
other. Of all the eccentricities of the Egyptian vocab- 
ulary, perhaps the most extraordinary feature is that, 
quite apart from the words that combine antithetical 
meanings, it possesses other compound words in which 2 
vocables of antithetical meanings are united so as to 
form a compound which bears the meaning of only 1 of 
its 2 constituents. According to Abel, it is in the oldest 



roots that antithetical double meanings are found to 
occur. In the subsequent course of the language’s 
development this ambiguity disappeared and, in Ancient 
Egyptian a any rate, all the intermediate stages can be 
followed, down to the unambiguousness of modern 
vocabularies. The concepts which could only be arrived 
at by means of an antithesis became, in course of time, 
sufficiently familiar to men’s minds to make an in- 
dependent existence possible for each of their 2 parts 
and accordingly to enable a separate phonetic repre- 
sentative to be formed for each part. 

1910H 11/163 

A special type of choice of object made by men. 
(Contributions to the psychology of love I) (1910). 

In the course of psychoanalytic treatment there are 
opportunities for collecting impressions of the way in 
which neurotics behave in love. A number of necessary 
preconditions for loving a particular object choice are 
presented. The first of the preconditions for loving is 
termed the precondition that there should be an injured 
third party; it stipulates that the person in question shall 
never choose as his love object a woman who is 
disengaged but only one to whom another man can 
claim right of possession. The second precondition is 
that a woman who is chaste and whose reputation is 
irreproachable never exercises an attraction that might 
raise her to the status of a love object but only a woman 
who is in some way or other, of bad repute sexually. 
This is connected with the experiencing of jealousy. The 
lover’s behavior towards the object he has chosen is also 
presented. In norma) love the woman’s value is measured 
by her sexual integrity and is reduced by any approach 
to the characteristic of being like a prostitute. Hence the 
fact that women with this characteristic are considered 
by neurotic men to be love objects of the highest value 
seems to be a striking departure from the normal. A 
fourth precondition is where the relationship is a 
compulsive one with the mar. showing an urge to rescue 
the woman he loves. The psychical origins of neurotic 
love are derived from the infantile fixation of tender 
feelings on the mother and represent one of the 
consequences of that fixation. The love objects are 
mother surrogates. There is a connection between the 
rescue motif and the parental complex which results in 
an urge to rescue the loved one. 

1912D 11/177 

On the universal tendency to debasement in the sphere 
of love. (Contributions to the psychology of love II) 
(1912). 

Psychical impotence affects men of strongly libid- 
inous natures and manifests itself in a- refusal to carry 
out the sexual act. A failure of this kind arises when the 
attempt is made with certain individuals. The foundation 



72 




1910K 11/219 



of the disorder is provided by an inhibition in the 
developmental history of the libido before it assumes the 
form of its normal termination. Two factors whose 
union is necessary to ensure a completely normal 
attitude in love have failed to combine: the affectionate 
and the sensual. The affectionate current springs from 
the earliest years of childhood; it is formed on the basis 
of the self-preservative instinct and is directed to the 
close members of 'the family. These affectionate fixa- 
tions persist throughout childhood, and continually 
carry along with them eroticism, which is consequently 
diverted from its sexual aims. Then at the age of puberty 
they are joined by the powerful sensual current which 
no longer mistakes its aims. Two factors decide whether 
the advance in the developmental path of the libido is to 
fail: 1) the amount of frustration in reality and 2) the 
amount of attraction which the relinquished infantile 
objects are able to exercise. The behavior in love of men 
in the civilized world bears the stamp of psychical 
impotence. The curb put upon love by civilization 
involves a universal tendency to debase sexual objects. 
The irreconcilable difference between the demands of 
the sexual and egoistic instincts has made men capable 
of ever higher achievements, though subject to a 
constant danger of neurosis to which the weaker 
succumb. 

1918A 11/191 

The taboo of virginity. (Contributions to the psychology 
of love III) (1918). 

For primitive peoples, defloration is a significant act; 
but it has become the subject of a religious taboo. 
Instead of reserving it for the girl’s bridegroom and 
future partner in marriage, custom demands that he shall 
shun the performance of it. The .first attempt at 
explanation is based on the honor of blood among 
primitive races who consider blood as the seat of love. A 
second explanation suggests that primitive man is prey 
to a perpetual lurking apprehensiveness, just as the 
psychoanalytic theory of the neuroses claims it to be the 
case with people suffering from anxiety neurosis. A third 
explanation draws attention to the fact that the taboo of 
virginity is part of a large totality which embraces the 
whole of sexual life. Wherever primitive man has set up a 
taboo he fears some danger and it cannot be disputed 
that a generalized dread of women is expressed. The 
intention underlying the taboo of defloration is that of 
denying or sparing the future husband something which 
cannot be dissociated from the first sexual act. The first 
act of intercourse mobi'izes a number of impulses which 
are out of place in the desired feminine attitude. 
Defloration has not only the one, civilized consequence 
of binding the woman lastingly to the man; it also 
unleashes an archaic reaction of hostility towards him, 
which is expressed in the appearance of inhibitions in 

73 



the erotic side of married life, and to which we may 
ascribe the fact that second marriages so often turn out 
better than the first. 

19101 11/209 

The psycho-analytic view of psychogenic disturbance of 
vision (1910). 

The psychoanalytic view of psychogenic disturbance 
of vision is presented. Hysterical blindness is taken as the 
type of a psychogenic visual disturbance. In a hysteric, 
the idea of being blind arises spontaneously. In patients 
predisposed to hysteria there is an inherent tendency to 
dissociation, to a falling apart of the connections in their 
mental field, as a consequence of which some uncon- 
scious processes do not continue as far as into the 
conscious. The hysterical patient is blind, not as the 
result of an autosuggestive idea that he cannot see, but 
as the result of a dissociation between unconscious and 
conscious processes in the act of seeing. The eyes 
perceive not only alterations in the external world, 
which are important for the preservation of life, but also 
characteristics of objects which lead to their being chosen 
as objects of love, their charms. The closer the relation 
into which an organ with a dual function enters with 
one of the major instincts, the more it withholds itself 
from the other. This principle is bound to lead to 
pathological consequences if the 2 fundamental instincts 
are disunited and if the ego maintains a repression of the 
sexual component instinct concerned. If an organ which 
serves the 2 sorts of instinct increases its erotogenic role, 
it is to be expected that this will not occur without the 
excitability and innervation of the organ undergoing 
changes which will manifest themselves as disturbances 
of its function in the service of the ego. 

1910K 11/219 

‘Wild’ Psycho-analysis (1910). 

A middle aged lady called upon Freud for a consulta- 
tion complaining of anxiety states. The precipitating 
cause of her anxiety states had been a divorce from her 
last husband but these states became worse after she 
consulted a young physician and he had informed her 
that the cause of her anxiety was her lack of sexual 
satisfaction. The doctor’s advice to the lady shows in 
what sense he understands the expression sexual life, 
namely, in which by sexual needs nothing is meant but 
the need for coitus or analogous acts producing orgasms 
and emission of the sexual substances. In contrast, in 
psychoanalysis, the concept of what is sexual comprises 
all the activities of the tender feelings which have 
primitive sexual impulses as their source. For this reason 
we prefer to speak of psychosexuality, thus laying stress 
on the point that the mental factor in sexual life should 
not be overlooked or underestimated. The doctor’s 
suggesting she solve this need for sexual satisfaction by 



82 




I f . 




1910G 11/231 

going back to her husband, taking a lover, or mastur- 
bating leaves no room for psychoanalysis. It is a long 
superseded idea that the patient suffers from a sort of 
ignorance, and that if one removes this ignorance by 
giving him information he is bound to recover. The 
pathological factor is not his ignorance in itself, but the 
root of this ignorance in his inner resistances. The task 
of the treatment lies in combating these resistances. 
Psychoanalytic intervention requires a fairly long period 
of contact with the patient. First, the patient must reach 
the area of what he has repressed, and secondly, he must 
have formed a sufficient attachment (transference) to 
the physician for his emotional relationship to him to 
make a fresh flight into neurosis impossible. It is 
concluded that ‘wild’ analysts do more harm to the 
cause of psychoanalysis than to the individual patients. 

1910G 11/231 

Contributions to a discussion on suicide (1910). 

If it is the case that youthful suicide occurs not only 
among pupils in secondary schools but also among 
apprentices and others, this fact does not acquit the 
secondary schools of their guilt in precipitating causes 
but it must perhaps be interpreted as meaning that (as 
regards its pupils) the secondary school takes the place 
of the traumas with which other adolescents meet in 
other walks of life. A secondary school should offer its 
students support and backing at a time of life at which 
the conditions of their development compel them to 
relax their ties with their parental home and their 
family. Schools fail in this, and in many respects fall 
short of their duty of providing a substitute for the 
family and of arousing interest in life in the world 
outside. The school must never forget that it has to deal 
with immature individuals who cannot be denied a right 
to linger at certain stages of development and even at 
certain disagreable ones. 

1910F 11/233 

Letter to Dr. Friedrich S. Krauss on ‘Anthropophyteia’ 
(1910). 

In a letter to Dr. Friedrich S. Krauss, Freud discusses 
Anthropophyteia. The erotic quips and comic anecdotes 
that have been collected and published in Anthro- 
pophyteia have been produced and repeated because 
they gave pleasure both to their narrators and their 
hearers. These tales give us direct information as to 
which of the component instincts of sexuality are 
retained in a given group of people as particularly 
efficient in producing pleasure; and in this way they give 
the neatest confirmation of the findings reached by the 
psychoanalytic examination of neurotics. Psychoanalysis 
has led us to assert that the anal region is the site of an 
erotogenic sensitivity. Anthropophyteia shows how 



universally people dwell with pleasure upon this part of 
the body, its performances and indeed the product of its 
function. In psychoanalysis today we describe a congeries 
of ideas and its associated affect as a complex; and we 
are prepared to assert that many of the most admired 
jokes are complexive jokes and that they owe their 
exhilarating and cheerful effect to the ingenious un- 
covering of what are as a rule repressed complexes. It is 
safe to hope that the psychological importance of 
folklore will be more and more clearly recognized, and 
that the relations between that branch of study and 
psychoanalysis will soon become more intimate. 

1910J 11/236 

Two instances of pathogenic phantasies revealed by the 
patients themselves (1910). 

Two instances of pathogenic phantasies revealed by 
the patients themselves are presented. A 20-year-old 
patient gave an unmistakable picture of a schizophreinic 
(dementia praecox, hebephrenia). During the initial 
stages of his illness he had exhibited periodic changes of 
mood and had made a considerable improvement. His 
relapse followed upon a week of festivities. When he was 
brought back to the institution, he said that the 
consulting physician had advised him to flirt with his 
mother a little. There can be no doubt that in his 
delusory paramnesia he was giving expression to the 
excitement which had been provoked in him by being in 
his mother’s company and which had been the im- 
mediate provocation of his relapse. More than 10 years 
ago, at a time when the findings and hypotheses of 
psychoanalysis were known to only a few people, the 
following events were reported. A girl, who was the 
daughter of a medical man, fell ill of hysteria with local 
symptoms. One day a friend of the patient’s asked her if 
she ever thought of consulting Dr. Freud. The patient 
replied that he would ask if she ever had the idea of 
having sexual intercourse with her father. It is not 
Freud’s practice to ask such questions; however, it is 
worth remarking that much of what patients report of 
the words and actions of their physicians may be 
understood as revelations of their own pathogenic 
phantasies. 

191 OM 11/238 

Review of Wilhelm Neutra’s ‘letters to neurotic women’ 
(1910). 

A review of Wilhelm Neutra’s Letters to Neurotic 
Women is presented. The book cannot be hailed as an 
encouraging phenomenon. The author, who is an as- 
sistant physician in the Gainfam hydropathic institute 
near Vienna, has borrowed the form of Oppenheim’s 
Psychotherapeutische Briefe and has given that form a 
psychoanalytic content. The author fails to attain the 



74 



o 

ERIC 

himiigaMioaia 



63 



191 1C 12/35 






merits of his model, tact and moral seriousness, and in 
his presentation of psychoanalytic theory he often drops 
into empty rhetoric and is also guilty of some misstate- 
ments. Nevertheless, much of what he writes is neatly 
and aptly expressed; and the book may pass muster as a 
work for popular consumption. 

VOL. XII Case History of Schreber, 
Papers on Technique and Other Works 
(1S>11— 1913) 

191 1C 12/3 

Psycho-analytic notes on an autobiographical account of 
a case of paranoia (dementia paranoides): Editor’s note 
(1958) and Introduction (1911). 

Psychoanalytic Notes upon an Autobiographical 
Account of a Case of Paranoia (Dementia Paranoides) is 
a reissue, with a number of corrections and additional 
notes, of the one published in 1925. Schieber’s Memoirs 
were published in 1903; but, though they had been 
widely discussed in psychiatric circles, they seem not to 
have attracted Freud’s attention till the summer of 
1910. Freud had attacked the problem of paranoia at a 
very early stage of his researches in psychopathology. 
The importance of the Schreber analysis, however, is not 
restricted to the light it throws on the problems of para- 
noia. A number of subjects are touched upon which 
were to be discussed afterwards at greater length. Thus, 
the remarks on narcissism were preliminary to the paper 
devoted to that subject, the account of the mechanism 
of repression was to be taken up again in the course of a 
few years, and the discussion of the instincts was feeling 
its way towards the more elaborate one in “Instincts and 
their Vicissitudes”. The case history makes use of only a 
single fact (Schreber’s age at the time he fell ill) that was 
not contained in the Memoirs. The psychoanalytic in- 
vestigation of paranoia would be altogether impossible if 
the patients themselves did not possess the peculiarity of 
betraying (in a distorted form, it is true) precisely those 
things which other neurotics keep hidden as a secret. 

191 1C 12/12 

Psycho-analytic notes on an autobiographical account of 
a case of paranoia (dementia paranoides) (1911). Part I. 
Case history of Schreber. 

A case history of paranoia is discussed. Dr. Schreber’s 
first illness began in the autumn of 1 884, and by the end 
of 1 885 he had completely recovered. The second illness 
set in at the end of October 1893 and grew rapidly 
worse. The patient was very preoccupied with his patho- 
logical experiences. He was inaccessible to any other 
impression and would sit perfectly rigid and motionless 
for hours. His delusional ideas gradually assumed a 



mystical and religious character. There were certain 
people (especially his physician, Flechsig) by whom he 
thought he was being persecuted and injured, and upon 
whom he poured abuse. By 1899, the patient’s condition 
had undergone a great change, and he now considered 
himself capable of carrying on an independent existence. 
The court judgment that gave Dr. Schreber back his 
liberty summarizes the content of his delusional system 
in a few sentences: He believed that he had a mission to 
redeem the world and to restore it to its lost state of 
bliss. This, however, he could only bring about if he 
were first transformed from a man into a woman. The 
emasculation phantasy was of a primary nature and 
originally independent of the Redeemer motif. The idea 
of being transformed into a woman was the salient fea- 
ture and the earliest germ of his delusional system. He 
thought there was a conspiracy against him that once his 
illness was recognized as incurable he would be handed 
over to a certain person who would take his soul and 
then to another person who would transform him into a 
female and sexually abuse him. Schreber’s mixture of 
reverence and rebelliousness in his attitudes towards God 
are discussed at length. One of the delusions the patient 
felt was that through God’s misunderstanding of living 
men, He was the instigator of the plot against him. In 
Schreber’s system, the 2 principal elements of his delu- 
sions (his transformation into a woman and his favored 
relation to God) are linked in his assumption of a femi- 
nine attitude towards God. It will be shown that there is 
a genetic relationship between these 2 elements. 

191 1C 12/35 

Psychoanalytic notes on an autobiographical account of 
a case of paranoia (dementia paranoides) (1911). Part II. 
Attempts at interpretation. 

Attempts at interpretation of the case history of 
paranoia are presented. Schreber’s case, at first took the 
form of delusions of persecution, and did not begin to 
lose it until the turning point of his illness. During the 
incubation period of his illness, between June 1893, and 
the following October, Schreber repeatedly dreamt that 
his old nervous disorder had returned. Schreber dreamed 
that Flechsig committed, or attempted to commit, soul 
murder upon him. This act was thought to be compar- 
able to the efforts made by the devil or by demons to 
gain possession of a soul. The exciting cause of the ill- 
ness was the appearance in him of a feminine (that is, a 
passive homosexual) wishful phantasy, which took as its 
object the figure of his doctor. An intense resistance to 
this phantasy arose on the part of Schreber’s personality, 
and the ensuing defensive struggle, took on that of a 
delusion of persecution. The person he longed for now 
became his persecutor, and the content of his wishful 
phantasy became the content of his persecution. The 
patient’s struggle with Flechsig became revealed to him 



75 

84 



191 1C 12/59 



as a conflict with God. This is construed as an infantile 
conflict with the father whom he loved; the details of 
that conflict were what determined the content of his 
delusions. In the final stage of Schreber’s delusion a mag* 
nificent victory was scored by the infantile sexual urge; 
for voluptuousness became God-fearing, and God Him- 
self (his father) never tired of demanding it from him. 
His father’s most dreaded threat, castration, actually 
provided the material for his wishful phantasy of being 
transformed into a woman. 

191 1C 12/59 

Psycho-analytic notes on an autobiographical account of 
a case of paranoia (dementia paranoides) (1911). Part 
III. On the mechanism of paranoia. 

The distinctive character of paranoia is found in the 
form assumed by the symptoms. Paranoia is a disorder in 
which a sexual etiology is by no means obvious; rather, 
the strikingly prominent features in the causation of 
paranoia, especially among males, are social humiliations 
and slights. The really operative factor in these social 
injuries lies in the part played in them by the homo- 
sexual components of emotional life. What lies at the 
core of the conflict in cases of paranoia among males is a 
homosexual wishful phantasy of loving a man. The fami- 
liar principal forms of paranoia can all be represented as 
contradictions of the single proposition: “I (a man) love 
him (a man),” and that they exhaust all the possible 
ways in which such contradictions could be formulated. 
The proposition is contradicted by: 1) delusions of per- 
secution; 2) erotomania; and 3) jealousy, alcoholic delu- 
sions of jealousy and delusions of jealousy in women. We 
can detect an element of megalomania in most other 
forms of paranoiac disorder. The most striking charac- 
teristic of symptom formation in paranoia is the process 
which deserves the name of projection. Repression is 
also connected with paranoia in the following 3 phases: 
fixation, repression proper, and irruption. Freud con- 
cluded that the neuroses arise from a conflict between 
the ego and the sexual instinct, and that the forms which 
the neuroses assume, retain the imprint of the course of 
development followed by the libido, and by the ego. 

191 2A 12/80 

Psycho-analytic notes on an autobiographical account of 
a case of paranoia (dementia paranoides) (1911). Post- 
script. 

In dealing with the case history of Schreber, Freud 
purposely restricted himself to a minimum of interpre- 
tation. Since he published his work upon Schreber, a 
chance acquisition of knowledge has put him in a posi- 
tion to appreciate one of his delusional beliefs more 
adequately, and to recognize the wealth of its bearing 
upon mythology: the patient’s peculiar relation to the 
sun, explained as a sublimated father symbol. When 



Schreber boasts that he can look into the sun unscathed 
and undazzled, he has rediscovered the mythological 
method of expressing his filial relation to the sun, and 
has confirmed Freud once again in his view that the sun 
is a symbol of the father. 

12/85 

Papers on technique (1911-1915). Editor’s introduc- 
tion (1958). 

In his contribution to Studies on Hysteria, Freud gave 
a very full account of the psychotherapeutic procedure 
which he had evolved on the basis of Breuer’s discov- 
eries. This may be described as the pressure technique 
and it still included considerable elements of suggestion, 
though it was advancing rapidly towards what he was 
soon to call the psychoanalytic method. Six papers, On 
the Technique of Psychoanalysis, cover a great number 
of important subjects. The relative paucity of Freud’s 
writings on technique, as well as his hesitations and de- 
lays over their production, suggests that there was some 
feeling of reluctance on his part to publishing this kind 
of material. Behind all his discussion of technique, how- 
ever, Freud never ceased to insist that a proper mastery 
of the subject could only be acquired from clinical ex- 
perience and not from books: clinical experience with 
patients, no doubt, but, above all clinical experience 
from the analyst’s own analysis. This, as Freud became 
more and more convinced, was the fundamental neces- 
sity for every practicing psychoanalyst. 

191 IE 12/89 

Papers on technique. The handling of dream- 
interpretation in psycho-analysis (1911). 

The handling of dream interpretation in psycho- 
analysis is presented. Anyone coming from dream inter- 
pretation to analytic practice will retain his interest in 
the content of dreams, and his inclination will be to 
interpret as fully as possible every dream related by the 
patient. The amount of interpretation which can be 
achieved in one session should be taken as sufficient and 
it is not to be regarded as a loss if the content of the 
dream is not fully discovered. On the following day, the 
interpretation of the dream is not to be taken up again 
as a matter of course, until it has become evident that 
nothing else has meanwhile forced its way into the fore- 
ground of the patient’s thoughts. Dream interpretation 
should not be pursued in analytic treatment as an art for 
its own sake, but its handling should be subject to those 
technical rules that govern the conduct of the treatment 
as a whole. The great majority of dreams forge ahead of 
the analysis; so that, after subtraction of everything in 
them which is already known and understood, there still 
remains a more or less clear hint at something which has 
hitherto been hidden. 



76 

S5 




1914G 12/145 



1912B 12/97 

Papers on technique. The dynamics of transference 
(1912). 

The dynamics of transference are discussed. Each 
individual, through the combined operation of his innate 
disposition and the influences brought to bear on him 
during his early years, has acquired a specific method of 
his own in his conduct of his erotic life. This produces 
what might be described as a stereotype plate, which is 
constantly repeated in the course of the person’s life. If 
someone’s need for love is not entirely satisfied by real- 
ity, he is bound to approach every new person whom he 
meets with libidinal anticipatory ideas. Thus it is a per- 
fectly normal and intelligible thing that the libidinal 
cathexis of someone who is partly unsatisfied, a cathexis 
which is held ready in anticipation, should be directed as 
well to the figure of the doctor. TTie cathexis will intro- 
duce the doctor into one of the psychical series which 
the patient has already formed. When anything in the 
complexive material (in the subject matter of the com- 
plex) is suitable for being transferred on to the figure of 
the doctor, that transference is carried out. It is inferred 
that the transference idea has penetrated into conscious- 
ness in front of any other possible associations because it 
satisfies the resistance. Transference in the analytic treat- 
ment invariably appears in the first instance as the 
strongest weapon of the resistance, and we may con- 
clude that the intensity and persistence of the trans- 
ference are an effect and an expression of the resistance. 
Transference to the doctor is suitable for resistance to 
the treatment only in so far as it is a negative transfer- 
ence or a positive transference of repressed erotic im- 
pulses. 

19I2E 12/109 

Papers on technique. Recommendations to physicians 
practising psycho-analysis (1912). 

Recommendations are presented to physicians prac- 
ticing psychoanalysis. The first problem is the task of 
keeping in mind all the innumerable names, dates, de- 
tailed memories and pathological products which each 
patient communicates, and of not confusing them with 
similar material produced by other patients under treat- 
ment simultaneously or previously. The physician should 
maintain the rule of giving equal notice to everything. 
This is the necessary counterpart to the demand made 
on the patient that he should communicate everything 
that occurs to him without criticism or selection. Freud 
cannot advise the taking of full notes, the keeping of a 
shorthand record, etc., during analytic sessions. The 
notes focus attention, tie up mental activity, and make 
an unfavorable impression. It is not a good thing to work 
on a case scientifically while treatment is still proceed- 
ing. The most successful cases are those in which one 



proceeds without any purpose in view. Under present 
day conditions the feeling that is most dangerous to a 
psychoanalyst is the therapeutic ambition to achieve, by 
this novel and much disputed method, something that 
will produce a convincing effect upon other people. The 
doctor should be opaque to his patients and, like a mir- 
ror, should show them nothing but what is shown to 
him. He should not bring his own feelings into play. 
Efforts to make use of the analytic treatment to bring 
about sublimation of instinct are, far from advisable in 
every case. The patient’s intellectual capacities should 
not be taxed. Mental activities such as thinking some- 
thing over or concentrating the attention solve none of 
the riddles of a neurosis. This can be done only by obey- 
ing the psychoanalytic rule. 

1913C 12/121 

Papers on technique. On beginning the treatment. (Fur- 
ther recommendations on the technique of psycho- 
analysis I) (1913). 

Recommendations on the technique of psycho- 
analysis concerning beginning the treatment are pre- 
sented. Lengthy preliminary discussions before the 
beginning of the analytic treatment, previous treatment 
by another method and also previous acquaintance 
between the doctor and the patient who is to be ana- 
lyzed, have special disadvantageous consequences for 
which one must be prepared. They result in the patient’s 
meeting the doctor with a transference attitude which is 
already established and which the doctor must first 
slowly uncover instead of having the opportunity to 
observe the growth and development of the transference 
from the outset. One must mistrust all prospective 
patients who want to make a delay before beginning 
their treatment. Points of importance at the beginning of 
the analysis are arrangement about time and money. 
What the material is with which one starts the treatment 
is a matter of indifference. But in any case the patient 
must be left to do the talking and must be free to choose 
at what point he shall begin. So long as the patient’s 
communications a:.d ideas run on without any obstruc- 
tion, the theme of transference should be left un- 
touched. In each case we must wait until the disturbance 
of the transference by the successive emergency of trans- 
ference resistances has been removed. 

1914G 12/145 

Papers on technique. Remembering, repeating and 
working- through. (Further recommendations on the 
technique of psycho-analysis II) (1914). 

Remembering, repeating, and working through are 
discussed. Forgetting impressions, scenes or experiences 
nearly always reduces itself to shutting them off. There 
is one special class of experiences for which no memory 



77 



0 

EMC 



S6 



1915A 12/157 

can as a rule be recovered. These are experiences which 
occurred in very early childhood and were not under* 
stood at the time but which were subsequently under- 
stood and interpreted. The patient does not remember 
anything of what he has forgotten and repressed, but 
acts it out. He reproduces it not as a memory but as an 
action; he repeats it, without knowing that he is repeat- 
ing it. Transference is itself only a piece of repetition; 
the repetition is a transference of the forgotten past not 
only on to the doctor but also on to all the other aspects 
of the current situation. The patient yields to the com- 
pulsion to repeat, which now replaces the impulsion to 
remember, not only in his personal attitude to his doctor 
but also in every other activity and relationship which 
may occupy his life at the time. The main instrument for 
curbing the patient’s compulsion to repeat and for turn- 
ing it into a motive for remembering, lies in the handling 
of the transference. We render the compulsion harmless, 
and indeed useful, by giving it the right to assert itself in 
a definite field. The first step in overcoming the resist- 
ances is made by the analyst’s uncovering the resistance, 
which is never recognized by the patient, and acquaint- 
ing him with it. One must allow the patient time to 
become more conversant with the resistance with which 
he has now become acquainted, to work through it, to 
overcome it, by continuing, in defiance of it, the ana- 
lytic work. Only when the resistance is at its height can 
the analyst discover the repressed instinctual impulses 
which are feeding the resistance. The working through of 
the resistances may in practice turn out to be an arduous 
task for the subject of the analysis and a trial of patience 
for the analyst. Theoretically, working through may cor- 
relate with the abreacting of the quotas of affect stran- 
gulated by repression. 

1915A 12/157 

Papers on technique. Observations on transference-love. 
(Further recommendations on the technique of psycho- 
analysis III) (1915). 

Observations on transference love (when a woman 
patient declares her love for the doctor) are presented. 
For the doctor, the phenomenon signifies a valuable 
piece of enlightenment and a useful warning against any 
tendency to a counter transference. He must recognize 
that the patient’s falling in love is induced by the ana- 
lytic situation. The patient has 2 alternatives; she must 
relinquish psychoanalytic treatment, or she must accept 
falling in love with her doctor as an inescapable fate. 
After falling in love, the patient loses all understanding 
of the treatment and all interest in it. This transference 
love is interpreted as a form of resistance. The analytic 
technique requires that the physician should deny to the 
patient, who is craving for love, the satisfaction she 
demands. The treatment must be carried* out in absti- 
nence. The analyst must keep firm hold of the transfer- 



ence love, but treat it as something unreal, as a situation 
which has to be gone through in the treatment and 
traced back to its unconscious origins and which must 
assist in bringing all that is most deeply hidden in the 
patient’s erotic life into her consciousness and therefore 
under her control. For the doctor, ethical motives unite 
with the technical ones to restrain him from giving the 
patient his love. However highly he may prize love he 
must prize even more highly the opportunity for helping 
his patient over a decisive stage in her life. 

1957 A 12/175 

Dreams in folklore (Freud and Oppenheim) (1957) 
(1911). 

Dreams in Folklore was written jointly by Freud and 
Professor D. E. Oppenheim of Vienna. The symbolism 
employed in the dreams in folklore coincides completely 
with that accepted by psychoanalysis. A number of 
these dreams are understood by the common people in 
the same way as they would be interpreted by psycho- 
analysis, that is, not as premonitions about a still unre- 
vealed future, but as the fulfillment of wishes, the satis- 
faction of needs which arise during the state of sleep. 
Penis symbolism appears in dreams occurring in folklore. 
Hie penis appears as: a sceptre, fat earthworm, a dagger 
and other sharp weapons. Feces symbolism and related 
dream actions also appear. In the very earliest period of 
childhood, feces is a highly prized substance, in relation 
to which coprophilic instincts find satisfaction. The 
most important residue of this former esteem is, how- 
ever, that all the interest which the child has had in feces 
is transferred in the adult on to another material which 
is set above almost everything else, gold. In dreams in 
folklore, gold is seen in the most unambiguous way to be 
a symbol of feces. Occasionally, the Devil appears as a 
bestower of treasure and a seducer. The defecation 
dreams in which the victim is a woman, deal with impo- 
tence. If the sleeper feels a need to defecate, he dreams 
of gold, of treasure. A few other dreams are analyzed 
including one about a lottery taken to symbolize a mar- 
riage contract. 

1913M 12/205 
On psycho-analysis (1913). 

Psychoanalysis is discussed. Psychoanalysis is a re- 
markable combination for it comprises not only a 
method of research into the neuroses but also a method 
of treatment based on the etiology thus discovered. 
Psychoanalysis started with researches into hysteria, but 
in the course of years it has extended far beyond that 
field of work. It was conclusively proved that hysterical 
symptoms are residues (reminiscences) of profoundly 
moving experiences, which have been withdrawn from 
everyday consciousness, and that their form is deter- 
mined (in a manner that excludes deliberate action) by 



78 



1912F 12/239 



details of the traumatic effects of the experiences. The 
first psychoanalytic examinations and attempts at treat- 
ment were made with the help of hypnotism. After- 
wards, this was abandoned and the work was carried nut 
by the method of free association with the patient 
remaining in his normal state. In all neuroses the patho- 
logical symptoms are really the end products of con- 
flicts, which have led to repression and splitting of the 
mind. The symptoms are generated by different mecha- 
nisms: either as formations in substitution for the re- 
pressed forces, or as compromises between the repressing 
and repressed forces, or as reaction formations and safe- 
guards against the repressed forces. 



191 IB 12/213 

Formulations on the two principles of mental function- 
ing (1911). 

Formulations on the Two Principles of Mental Func- 
tioning has as its main theme the distinction betv/een the 
regulating principles (the pleasure principle and the real- 
ity principle) which respectively dominate the primary 
and secondary mental processes. Every neurosis has as its 
result a forcing of the patient out of real life. Neurotics 
turn away from reality because they find it unbearable. 
The most extreme type of this turning away from reality 
is shown by certain cases of hallucinatory psychosis 
which seek to deny the particular event that occasioned 
the outbreak of their insanity. In the psychology which 
is founded on psychoanalysis, we have become accus- 
tomed to taking as our starting point the unconscious 
mental processes. We consider these to be the older, 
primary processes. The governing purpose obeyed by 
these primary processes is described as the pleasure prin- 
ciple. The setting up of the reality principle was a 
momentous step. The increased significance of external 
reality heightened the importance of the sense organs 
that are directed towards the external world. With the 
introduction of the reality principle, phantasizing and 
daydreaming were split off. The supersession of the 
pleasure principle by the reality principle is not accom- 
plished all at once; nor does it take place simultaneously 
all along the line. Just as the pleasure ego can do nothing 
but wish, work for a yield of pleasure, and avoid un- 
pleasure, so the reality ego need do nothing but strive 
for what is useful and guard itself against damage. Edu- 
cation is described as an incitement to the conquest of 
the pleasure principle. Art brings about a reconciliation 
between the 2 principles. While the ego goes through its 
transformation from a pleasure ego into a reality ego, 
the sexual instincts undergo the changes that lead them 
from the autoeroticism through various intermediate 
phases to object love in the service of procreation. 



1912C 12/227 

Types of onset of neurosis (1912). 

Types of onset of neurosis are described. The first 
type may be described in general terms as frustration. In 
the second type, the subject does not fall ill as a result of 
a change in the external world which has replaced satis- 
faction by frustration, but as a result of an internal 
effort. He falls ill of his attempt to adapt himself to 
reality and to fulfill the demands of reality, an attempt 
in the course of which he comes up against insurmount- 
able internal difficulties. The third type concerns those 
people who fall ill as soon as they get beyond the irre- 
sponsible age of childhood. The essential feature of the 
dispositional processes is that their libido has never left 
its infantile fixations; the demands of reality are not 
suddenly made upon a wholly or partly mature person, 
but arise from the very fact of growing older. The fourth 
type involves people who fall ill who have hitherto been 
healthy, who have met with no fresh experience and 
whose relation to the external world has undergone no 
change. As a result of their having reached a particular 
period of life, and in conformity with regular biological 
processes, the quantity of libido in their mental econ- 
omy has experienced an increase which is in itself 
enough to upset the equilibrium of their health and to 
set up the necessary conditions for a neurosis. 



1912F 12/239 

Contributions to a discussion on masturbation (1912). 

Contributions to a discussion on masturbation are 
presented. The discussion on masturbation in the Vienna 
Psychoanalytical Society lasted for several months and 
was conducted on the plan of each speaker in turn read- 
ing a paper, which was followed by an exhaustive 
debate. All of the members agreed on the following 
points: l)the importance of the phantasies which 
accompany or represent the act of masturbation; 2) the 
importance of the sense of guilt which is attached to 
masturbation; and 3) the impossibility of assigning a 
qualitative determinant for the injurious effects of 
masturbation. The following unresolved differences of 
opinion appeared: 1) a denial of a somatic factor in the 
effects of masturbation ; 2) a general denial of the inju- 
rious effects of masturbation; 3) the origin of the sense 
of guilt; and 4) the ubiquity of masturbation in child- 
hood. Significant uncertainties exist: 1) the mechanism 
of the injurious effects of masturbation, and 2) the eti- 
ological relation of masturbation to the actual neuroses. 
We are confronted, in the neuroses, with cases in which 
masturbation has done damage. This damage seems to 
occur in 3 different ways: 1) organic injury may occur 
by some unknown mechanism; 2) the injury may occur 
through the laying down of a psychical pattern accord- 
ing to which there is no necessity for trying to alter the 



7 88 



1912G 12/255 



external world in order to satisfy a great need; or 3) a 
fixation of infantile sexual aims may be made possible, 
and a persistence of psychical infantilism. 

1912G 12/255 

A note on the unconscious in psycho-analysis (1912). 

The unconscious in psychoanalysis is discussed. A 
conception, or any other psychical element, which is 
now present to the consciousness may become absent 
the next moment, and may become present again, after 
an interval, unchanged, and from memory, not as a 
result of a fresh perception by our senses. It is this fact 
which we are accustomed to account for by the suppo- 
sition that during the interval the conception has been 
present in our mind, although latent in consciousness. 
The conception which is present to our consciousness 
and of which we are aware is the meaning of the term 
conscious. As for latent conceptions, they are denoted 
by the meaning of the term conscious. We learn by the 
analysis of neurotic phenomena that a latent or uncon- 
scious idea is not necessarily a weak one, and that the 
presence of such an idea in the mind admits of indirect 
proofs of the most cogent kind, which are equivalent to 
the direct proof furnished by consciousness. A forecon- 
scious activity passes into consciousness with no diffi- 
culty; an unconscious activity remains so and seems to 
be cut off from consciousness. The latent thoughts of 
the dream differ in no respect from the products of our 
regular conscious activity; they deserve the name of 
foreconscious (preconscious) thoughts, and may indeed 
have been conscious at some moment of waking life. 

1913A 12/267 
An evidential dream (1913). 

An evidential dream is discussed. A lady suffering 
from doubting mania and obsessive ceremonials, insisted 
that her nurses should never let her out of their sight for 
a single moment: otherwise she would begin to brood 
about forbidden actions that she might have committed 
while she was not being watched. One evening, while she 
was resting on the sofa, she thought she saw that the 
nurse on duty had fallen asleep. When questioned, the 
nurse started up and replied that she saw the patient. 
This gave the patient grounds for a fresh doubt, and 
after a time she repeated her question, which the nurse 
met with renewed protestations; just at that moment 
another attendant came in bringing the patient’s supper. 
This incident occurred one Friday evening. The next 
morning, the nurse recounted a dream which had the 
effect of dispelling the patient’s doubts. The essential 
factor in the construction of dreams is an unconscious 
wish, as a rule a now repressed infantile wish, which can 
come to expression in this somatic or psychical material 
(in the day’s residues too, therefore) and can thus supply 



these with a force which enables them to press their way 
through to consciousness even during the suspension of 
thought at night. The dream is in every case a fulfillment 
of this unconscious wish, whatever else it may contain: 
warning, reflection, admission, or any other part of the 
rich content of preconscious waking life that has per- 
sisted undealt with into the night. 

1913D 12/279 

The occurrence in dreams of material from fairy tales 
(1913). 

The occurrence in dreams of material from fairy tales 
is discussed. Psychoanalysis confirms our recognition of 
the important place which folk fairytales have acquired 
in the mental life of our children. In a few people, a 
recollection of their favorite fairytales takes the place of 
memories of their own childhood; they have made the 
fairytales into screen memories. Elements and situations 
derived from fairytales are also frequently to be found in 
dreams. A dream of a young married woman who had 
had a visit from her husband a few days before was 
presented. In the dream a manikin entered the same 
room as the woman and proceeded to dance and cany 
on. The description of the manikin’s personal appear- 
ance fitted the dreamer’s father-in-law without any alter- 
ation being necessary. Immediately afterwards, however, 
she thought of the story of Rumpelstiltskin. The brown 
room she saw reminded her of her parents’ dining room, 
panelled in brown wood. Then she began to speak of 
beds too uncomfortable for two to sleep in. The brown 
wood room became in the first place a bed, and through 
the connection with a dining room, it was a marriage 
bed. The situation was a representation of intercourse. A 
young man told Freud about a dream that concerned 
night time and he was lying in his bed. Suddenly the 
window opened of its own accord and there were 6 or 7 
wolves sitting on the big walnut tree in front of the 
window. He thought that the picture of a wolf standing 
upright must have been an illustration to the story of 
Little Red Riding Hood. It is the earliest anxiety dream 
that the dreamer remembered from his childhood. It was 
interpreted that the wolf was merely a first father sur- 
rogate. 

191 3F 12/289 

The theme of the three caskets (1913). 

The theme of the 3 caskets from The Merchant of 
Venice is discussed. Portia is bound to take as her hus- 
band that one who chooses the right casket from among 
the 3 before him. The 3 caskets are of gold, silver, and 
lead. Two suitors have already departed unsuccessful: 
they have chosen gold and silver. Bassanio, the third, 
decides in favor of lead; thereby he wins the bride, 
whose affection was already his before the trial of 
fortune. Shakespeare did not invent this oracle of the 



80 



0 



89 



1913B 



12/327 




». 



choice of a casket; he took it from a tale in the Gesta 
Romanorum, in which a girl has to make the same 
choice to win the Emperor’s son. Here too, the third 
metal, lead, is the bringer of fortune. The theme is a 
human one, a man’s choice between 3 women. This same 
content is found in King Lear when the King resolves to 
divide his kingdom while he is still alive, among his 3 
daughters. He disowns Cordelia and divides the kingdom 
between the other 2, to his own and the general ruin. 
The shepherd Paris has to choose between 3 goddesses, 
of whom he declares the third to be the most beautiful. 
Cinderella is a youngest daughter, who is preferred by 
the prince to her 2 elder sisters. Psyche, in Apuleius’s 
story, is the youngest and fairest of 3 sisters. Gold and 
silver are considered “loud”; while lead is considered 
dumb. In all the stories, there are 3 women of whom the 
youngest is the best. The Twelve Brothers, a Grimm 
Fairy Tale, involves a woman who remains dumb for 7 
years in order to save her brothers. The earliest Greek 
mythology only knew a single Moera. She later devel- 
oped into 3 sister goddesses. It is argued that what is 
represented are the 3 forms taken by the figure of the 
mother in the course of a man’s life: the mother, the 
wife, and Mother Earth who receives him after death. 

1913G 12/303 

Two lies told by children (1913). 

Two lies told by children are discussed. A number of 
lies told by well reared children have a particular sig- 
nificance and should cause those in charge of them to 
reflect rather than be angry. These lies occur under the 
influence of excessive feelings of love, and become 
momentous when they lead to a misunderstanding 
between the child and the person it loves. Taking money 
from anyone had come to mean to 'one of Freud’s 
patients a physical surrender, an erotic relation. Taking 
money from her father was equivalent to a declaration 
of love. She could not admit, however, that she had 
appropriated the money; she was obliged to disavow it, 
because her motive for the deed, which was unconscious 
to herself, could not be admitted. Her father’s punish- 
ment was thus a rejection of the tenderness she was 
offering him, and so it broke her spirit. A woman who 
was seriously ill in consequence of a frustration in life 
was in her earlier years a particularly capable, truth- 
loving, serious and virtuous girl, and became an affec- 
tionate wife. As the eldest of 5 children, the little girl 
early developed an unusually strong attachment to her 
father, which was destined, when she was grown up to 
wreck her happiness in life. The sense of guilt that was 
attached to her excessive fondness for her father found 
its expression in connection with her attempted decep- 
tion; an admission was impossible because it would 
inevitably have been an admission of her hidden inces- 
tuous love. 



19131 12/311 

The disposition to obsessional neurosis. A contribution 
to the problem of choice of neurosis (1913). 

The Disposition to Obsessional Neurosis was read by 
Freud before the Fourth International Psychoanalytical 
Congress. The grounds for determining the choice of 
neurosis are in the nature of dispositions and are inde- 
pendent of experiences which operate pathogenically. 
The dispositions are inhibitions in development. The 
order in which the main forms of psychoneurosis are 
usually enumerated: Hysteria, Obsessional Neurosis, 
Paranoia, and Schizophrenia (Dementia Praecox), corres- 
ponds (even though not exactly) to the order of the ages 
at which the onset of these disorders occurs. Hysterical 
forms of illness can be observed even in earliest child- 
hood; obsessional neurosis usually shows its first 
symptoms in the second period of childhood (between 
the ages of 6 and 8); while the 2 other psychoneuroses 
do not appear until after puberty and during adult life. 
Once the sexual organization which contains the dispo- 
sition to obsessional neurosis is established it is never 
afterwards completely surmounted. The impulses of 
hatred and anal eroticism play a strong part in the 
symptomatology of obsessional neurosis. Psychoanalysis 
stands or falls with the recognition of the sexual com- 
ponent instincts, of the erotogenic zones and of the 
extension thus made possible of the concept of a sexual 
function in contrast to the narrower genital function. 
The antithesis between male and female is not present at 
the stage of pregenital object choice. The processes of 
the formation of character are more obscure and less 
accessible to analysis than neurotic ones. The develop- 
mental disposition to a neurosis is only complete if the 
phase of the development of the ego at which fixation 
occurs is taken into account as well as that of the 
libido. There remains for hysteria an intimate relation to 
the final phase of libidinal development, which is charac- 
terized by the primacy of the genitals and the introduc- 
tion of the reproductive fur.ction. 

1913B 12/327 

Introduction to Pfister’s ‘The psycho-analytic method’ 
(1913). 

The Introduction to Pfister’s The Psychoanalytic 
Method is presented. Psychoanalysis had its origin on 
medical soil, as a therapeutic procedure for the treat- 
ment of certain nervous illnesses which were termed 
functional and which were considered with increasing 
certainty to be consequences of disturbances in' emo- 
tional life. It attains its end by assuming that the 
symptoms are not the only possible and final outcome 
of particular psychical processes. It uncovers the history 
of the development of the symptoms in the patient’s 
memory, it revivifies the processes underlying them, and 



o 

ERIC 

himiififlMiaaa 



81 




1913K 12/333 



then conducts them, under the doctor’s guidance, to a 
more favorable outlet. Education and therapeutics stand 
in an assignable relation to each other. Education seeks 
to ensure that certain of a child’s innate dispositions and 
inclinations shall not cause any damage either to the 
individual or to society. Therapeutics come into action if 
these same dispositions have already led to the unwished 
for result of pathological symptoms. Let us hope that 
the application of psychoanalysis to the service of edu- 
cation will quickly fulfill the hopes which educators and 
doctors may rightly attach to it. 

1913K 12/333 

Preface to Bourke’s ‘Scatalogic rites of all nations’ 
(1913). 

The Preface to Bourke’s Scatalogic Rites of All Na- 
tions, is presented. The lesson that bodily cleanliness is 
far more readily associated with vice than with virtue 
often occurred to Freud, when psychoanalytic work 
made him acquainted with the way in which civilized 
men deal with the problem of their physical nature. 
They are clearly embarrassed by anything that reminds 
them too much of their animal origin. The chief finding 
from psychoanalytic research has been the fact that the 
human infant is obliged to recapitulate during the early 
part of his development the changes in the attitude of the 
human race towards excremental matters which prob- 
ably had their start when homo sapiens first raised him- 
self off Mother Earth. In the earliest years of infancy 
there is no trace of shame about the excretory functions 
or of disgust at excreta. Psychoanalysis shows that, to 
begin with, excremental and sexual instincts are not dis- 
tinct from each other in children. Folklore shows us how 
incompletely the repression of coprophilic inclinations 
has been carried out among various peoples at various 
times and how closely at other cultural levels the treat- 
ment of excretory substances approximates to that 
practiced by children. 

191 ID 12/341 

The significance of sequences of vowels (1911). 

The significance of sequences of vowels is discussed. 
In dreams and associations, names which have to be 
concealed seem to be replaced by others that resemble 
them only in containing the same sequence of vowels. A 
striking analogy is, however, provided from the history 
of religion. Among the ancient Hebrews the name of 
God was taboo; it might neither be spoken aloud nor 
written down. This prohibition was so implicitly obeyed 
that to this very day the vocalization of the 4 conso- 
nants in God’s name (YHVH) remains unknown. It was, 
however, pronounced Jehovah, being supplied with the 
vowels of the word Adnoai, against which there was no 
such prohibition. 



191 IF 12/342 

‘Great is Diana of the Ephesians’ (1911). 

The ancient Greek city of Ephesus in Asia Minor was 
especially celebrated in antiquity for its splendid temples 
dedicated to Artemis (Diana). The evidence of excava- 
tions shows that in the course of centuries several 
temples were erected on the same site in honor of the 
goddess. In about A.D. 54, the apostle Paul spent several 
years at Ephesus. He preached, performed miracles, and 
found a large following among the people. He was per- 
secuted and accused by the Jews; and he separated from 
them and founded an independent Christian community. 
The church founded by Paul at Ephesus did not long 
remain faithful to him. It came under the influence of a 
man named John. The city was conquered by Islam and 
finally was ruined and abandoned, because the river on 
which it stood became choked with sand. But even then 
the great goddess of Ephesus had not abandoned her 
claims. In our own days she appeared as a saintly virgin 
to a pious German girl, Katharina Emmerich, at Dulmen. 
She described to her, her journey to Ephesus, the fur- 
nishings of the house in which she had lived there and in 
which she had died, the shape of her bed, and so on. 
And both the house and the bed were in fact found, 
exactly as the virgin had described them, and they are 
once more the goal of the pilgrimages of the faithful. 



1913E 12/345 

Preface to Maxim Steiner’s ‘The psychical disorders of 
male potency’ (1913). 

“The preface to Maxim Steiner’s The Psychical Dis- 
orders of Male Potency ” is presented. Steiner is one of 
the small band of physicians who recognized the im- 
portance of psychoanalysis for the special branch of 
medicine and who have never since ceased to perfect 
themselves in its theory and technique. Only a small part 
of neurotic ailments are dealt with in neuropathology 
itself. The greater number of them find a place among 
the disorders of the particular organ which is the victim 
of a neurotic disturbance. It is therefore expedient and 
proper that the treatment of these symptoms or syn- 
dromes should also be the business of the specialist, who 
is alone capable of making a differential diagnosis be- 
tween a neurotic and an organic illness, who can draw 
the line, in the case of mixed forms, between their 
organic and neurotic elements, and who can in general 
give us information on the way in which the 2 factors in 
the disease mutually reinforce each other. We may hope 
that the time is not far distant when it will be generally 
recognized that no sort of nervous disturbance can be 
understood and treated without the help of the line of 
approach and often of the technique of psychoanalysis. 



82 



o 

ERIC 



91 



1912X 13/18 



VOL, XIII Totem and Taboo and 
Other Works (1913-1914) 

1912X 13/ix 

Totem and taboo (1913). Editor’s note (1955) and 
prefaces (1913, 1930). 

In his Preface to Totem and Taboo , Freud tells us 
that his first stimulus for writing these essays came from 
the works of Wundt and Jung. Actually, his interest in 
social anthropology went back much further. The major 
elements of Freud’s contribution to social anthropology 
made their first appearance in this work, and more 
especially in the fourth essay, which contains his 
hypothesis of the primal horde and the killing of the 
primal father and elaborates his theory tracing from 
them the origins of almost the whole of later social and 
cultural institutions. Freud had begun his preparations 
for the work, and in particular his reading of a large 
amount of literature on the subject, as early asin 1910. 
Totem and Taboo was translated into several languages 
besides English during Freud’s lifetime: into Hungarian, 
Spanish, Portuguese, French, Japanese , and Hebrew. The 
4 essays were originally published in the first 2 vol- 
umes of Imago. They represent a first attempt on 
Freud’s part to apply the point of view and the findings of 
psychoanalysis to some unsolved problems of social 
psychology. The analysis of taboo is put forward as an 
assured and exhaustive attempt at the solution of the 
problem. The investigation of totemism does no more 
than declare that here is what psychoanalysis can at the 
moment contribute towards elucidating the problem of 
the totem. 

1912X 13/1 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part I. The horror of incest. 

The horror of incest is discussed. The Australian 
aborigines, set before themselves with the most scrupu- 
lous care and the most painful severity the aim of 
avoiding incestuous sexual relations. Their whole social 
organization seems to serve that purpose or to have been 
brought into relation with its attainment. Among the 
Australians the place of all the religious and social 
institutions which they lack is taken by the system of 
totemism. A totem is, as a rule, an animal and more 
rarely a plant or a natural phenomenon, which stands in 
a peculiar relation to the whole clan. In almost every 
place where there are totems there is also a law against 
persons of the same totem having sexual relations with 
one another and consequently against their marrying. 
The violation of the prohibition is avenged in the most 
energetic fashion by the whole clan. Exogamy linked 
with the totem effects more than the prevention of 
incest with a man’s mothers and sisters. It makes sexual 
intercourse impossible for a man with all the women of 



his own clan by treating them all as blood relatives. 
Totemic exogamy appears to have been the means tor 
preventing group incest. In an Australian tribe, 12 totem 
clans are divided into 4 subphratries and 2 phratries. All 
the divisions are exogamous. Various customary prohibi- 
tions (avoidances) are discussed such as those in Mela- 
nesia where intercourse between a boy and his mother 
and sisters is avoided by the boy moving out of the 
house. He subsequently does not meet them in public or 
speak of them. Similar customs prevail in New Cale- 
donia, New Britain, New Mecklenburg, Fiji and Sumatra. 
The most widespread and strictest avoidance is that 
which restricts a man’s intercourse with his mother-in- 
law. Incestuous wishes (childhood incestuous wishes that 
have been repressed) later become unconscious, and are 
regarded by savage peoples as immediate perils against 
which the most severe measures of defense must be 
enforced. 

1912X 13/18 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part II. Taboo and emotional 
ambivalence. (1). 

Taboo has about it a sense of something unapproach- 
able, and it is principally expressed in prohibitions and 
restrictions. Taboo restrictions are distinct from religious 
or moral prohibitions. Wundt described taboo as the 
oldest human unwritten code of laws. The source of 
taboo is attributed to a peculiar magical power which is 
inherent in persons and spirits and can be conveyed by 
them through the medium of inanimate objects. Taboos 
may be permanent or temporary. Behind all the prohibi- 
tions there seems to be something in the nature o! a 
theory that they are necessary because certain persons 
and things are charged with a dangerous power, which 
can be transformed through contact with them, almost 
like an infection. The quantity of this dangerous 
attribute also plays a part. Some people or things have 
more of it than others and the danger is actually 
proportional to the difference of potential of the 
charges. Anyone who has transgressed one of these 
prohibitions himself acquires the characteristic of being 
prohibited. The word taboo denotes everything, whether 
a person or a place or a thing or a transitory condition, 
which is the vehicle or source of the mysterious 
attribute. According to Wundt, the true sources of taboo 
lie deeper than in the interests of the privileged classes: 
they have their origin in the source of the most primitive 
and at the same time most lasting of human instincts, in 
fear of ‘demonic’ powers. The original characteristic of 
taboo (that a demonic power lies hidden in an object 
and if the object is touched it takes its vengeance by 
casting a spell over the wrong-doer) is still ‘objectified 
fear.’ That fear has not yet split into the 2 forms into 
which it later develops: veneration and horror. Also 
according to Wundt, the distinction between sacred and 



8 ? 

o S2 

ERIC 



1912X 13/26 

unclean did not exist in the primitive beginnings of 
taboo; therefore taboo applies both to what is sacred 
and what is unclean through dread of contact with it. 

I912X 13/26 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part II. Taboo and emotional 
ambivalence. (2). Parallel between taboo and obsessional 
neurosis. 

Anyone approaching the problem of taboo from the 
angle of psychoanalysis, will recognize that the phe- 
nomena of taboo are far from unfamiliar. The most 
obvious and striking point of agreement between the 
obsessional prohibitions of neurotics and taboos is that 
these prohibitions are equally lacking in motive and 
equally puzzling in their origin. As in the case of taboo, 
the principal prohibition, the nucleus of the neurosis, is 
against touching; thus sometimes known as touching 
phobia. Obsessional prohibitions are extremely liable to 
displacement. Obsessional prohibitions involve just as 
extensive renunciations and restrictions in the lives of 
those who are subject to them as do taboo prohibitions; 
but some of them can be lifted if certain actions are 
performed. Thereafter, these actions must be performed: 
they become compulsive or obsessive acts, and there can 
be no doubt that they are in the nature of expiation, 
penance, defensive measures, and purification. A con- 
tinuing conflict between the prohibition and the instinct 
to do something is called a psychical fixation. The 
principal characteristic of this psychological constel- 
lation is described as the subject’s ambivalent attitude 
towards a single object or an act connected with that 
object. The transmissibility of taboo is a reflection of 
the tendency for the unconscious instinct in the neurosis 
to shift constantly along associative paths on to new 
objects. If the violation of a taboo can be made good by 
atonement or expiation, which involve the renunciation 
of some possession or some freedom, this proves that 
obedience to the taboo injunction meant in itself the 
renunciation of something desirable. It is concluded that 
taboo is a primaeval prohibition forcibly imposed from 
outside, and directed against the most powerful longings 
to which human beings are subject. The desire to violate 
it persists in their unconscious; those who obey the 
taboo have an ambivalent attitude to what the taboo 
prohibits. 

1912X 13/35 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part II. Taboo and emotional 
ambivalence. (3). The treatment of enemies. 

The taboos connected with the treatment of enemies 
are discussed. The killing of a man is governed by a 
number of observances which are included among the 
usages of taboo. These observances falhinto the follow- 
ing 4 groups: 1) the appeasement of the slain enemy; 2) 



restrictions upon the slayer; 3) acts of expiation and 
purification by him; and 4) certain ceremonial observ- 
ances. The conclusion that is drawn from all these 
observances is that the impulses which they express 
towards an enemy are not solely hostile ones. They are 
also manifestations of remorse, of admiration for the 
enemy, and of a bad conscience for having killed him. In 
the accepted explanation of all the observances of 
appeasement, restriction, expiation, and purification, 2 
principles are combined: the extension of the taboo 
from the slain man on to everything that has come in 
contact with him, and the fear of the slain man’s ghost. 
In Freud’s explanation, stress is put on the unity of the 
view, which derives all of these observances from 
emotional ambivalence towards the enemy. 

1912X 13/41 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part II. Taboo and emotional 
ambivalence. (3). (b). The taboo upon rulers. 

The taboos connected with the treatment of rulers 
are discussed. The attitude of primitive peoples to their 
chiefs, kings, and priests is governed by 2 basic prin- 
ciples. A ruler must not only be guarded, he must also be 
guarded against. Rulers must be guarded against because 
they are vehicles of the mysterious and dangerous 
magical power which is transmitted by contact like an 
electric charge and which brings death and ruin to 
anyone who is not protected by a similar charge. The 
need to protect the king from every possible form of 
danger follows from his immense importance to his 
subjects. The ceremonial taboo of kings is ostensibly the 
highest honor and protection for them, while actually it 
is a punishment for their exaltation, a revenge taken on 
them by their subjects. An element of distrust may be 
traced among the reasons for the taboo observances that 
surround the king. One of the most glaring instances of a 
sacred ruler being fettered and paralysed by taboo 
ceremonials was found in the mode of life of the 
Japanese Mikado in earliev centuries. Some of the taboos 
laid upon barbarian kings are similar to the restrictions 
imposed upon murderers. The taboos not only pick out 
the king and exalt him above all common mortals, but 
also make his existence a torment and an intolerable 
burden, and reduce him to a bondage worse than that of 
his subjects. 

191 2X 13/51 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part II. Taboo and emotional 
ambivalence. (3). (c). The taboo upon the dead. (4). 
Taboo and conscience. 

The taboo upon the dead is especially virulent among 
most primitive peoples. It is manifested in the conse- 
quences that follow contact with the dead and in the 
treatment of mourners. The taboo observances after 



84 



93 



1912X 13/100 



bodily contact with the dead are the same for Polynesia, 
Melanesia and a part of Africa. Their most regular 
feature is the prohibition against those who have had 
such contact to the touching of food themselves, and the 
consequent necessity for their being fed by other people. 
Essentially the same prohibitions apply to those who 
have been in contact with the dead only in a metaphor- 
ical sense. One of the most puzzling, but at the same 
time instructive, usages in connection with mourning is 
the prohibition against uttering the name of the dead 
person, since the name is regarded as an essential part of 
a man’s personality and as an important possession. 
Obsessional neurotics b rave exactly like savages in 
relation to names. Those who employ this taboo are 
afraid of the presence or of the return of the dead 
person’s ghost. It is supposed that a dearly loved relative 
turns into a demon at the moment of his death and his 
survivors can expect nothing but hostility. Here we see 
the ambivalence of human emotions where a mourner 
reproaches himself for the death of a loved one, 
knowning that unconsciously he wished for the death. 
Unconscious hostility is projected on to demons in the 
case of taboo of the dead. The explanation of taboo also 
throws light on the nature and origin of conscience: that 
conscience arose also on the basis of emotional ambiva- 
lence and under the same conditions, (that one of the 
opposing feelings involved shall be unconscious and kept 
under repression by the compulsive domination of the 
other one). Violation of taboo among primitive peoples 
results in punishment of whoever was responsible for 
violating the taboo while in obsessional neuroses perfor- 
mance of the forbidden act causes punishment of a 
person other than the one committing the act. What 
actually happens in the latter case is that the original 
wish that the loved person may die is replaced by the 
fear that he may die, thus giving a neurosis that is 
compensating for an underlying contrary attitude of 
brutal egoism. The neuroses are asocial structures; they 
endeavour to achieve by private means what is effected in 
society by collective effort. Taboo observances, like 
neurotic symptoms, have this double sense. 

1912X 13/75 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part III. Animism, magic and 
the omnipotence of thoughts. (1). Animism. (2). Magic. 

The psychoanalytic approach states that it is not to 
be supposed that men were inspired to create their first 
system of the universe by pure specuiative curiosity. The 
practical need for controlling the world around them 
must have played its part. Sorcery is essentially the art 
of influencing spirits by treating them in the same way 
as one would treat men in like circumstances: appeasing 
them, making amends to them, propitiating them, 
intimidating them, robbing them of their power, sub- 
duing them to one’s will, etc. Magic, on the other hand, 
is something different: fundamentally, it disregards 



spirits ami makes use of special procedures and not of 
everyday psychological methods. Magic has to serve the 
most varied purposes: it must subject natural phe- 
nomena to the will of man, it must protect the 
individual from his enemies and from dangers, and it 
must give him power to injure his enemies. One of the 
most widespread magical procedures for injuring an 
enemy is by making an effigy of him from any 
convenient material. Whatever is then done to the effigy 
is believed to happen to the detested original. There is 
another procedure by which an enemy can be injured. 
One gets possession of some of his hair or nails or other 
waste products or even a piece of his clothing, and 
treates them in some hostile way. The principle govern- 
ing magic, the technique of the animistic mode of 
thinking, is the principle of the omnipotence of thought. 

1912X 13/85 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part III. Animism, magic, 
omnipotence of thoughts. (3). Omnipotence of 
thoughts. (4). Totemism is a system. 

In obsessional neuroses the survival of the omnipo- 
tence of thoughts (strange and uncanny events which 
pursue) is most clearly visible. The primary obsessive 
acts of neurotics are of an entirely magical character. In 
primitive man, the process of thinking is sexualized; this 
attitude may plausibly be brought into relation with 
narcissism and be regarded as an essential component of 
it. In only a single field of our civilization, art, has the 
omnipotence of thoughts being retained. The first 
picture which man formed of the world, animism, was a 
psychological one. The technique of animism, magic, 
reveals in the clearest and most unmistakable way an 
intention to impose the laws governing mental life upon 
real things; in this, spirits need not as yet play any part, 
though spirits may be taken as objects of magical 
treatment. Spirits and demons are only projections of 
man’s own emotional impulses. He turns his emotional 
cathexes into persons, he peoples the world with them 
and meets his internal mental processes again outside 
himself. Thus man’s first theoretical achievement, the 
creation of spirits, seems to have arisen from the 
observances of taboo. With primitive man, superstition 
need not be the only or the real reason for some 
particular custom or observance and does not excuse us 
from the duty of searching for its hidden motives. Under 
the domination of an animistic system it is inevitable 
that every observance and every activity shall have a 
systematic basis, which we now describe as superstitious. 

191 2X 13/100 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part IV. The return of 
totemism in childhood: (1). The nature of totemism. 

The return of totemism in childhood is discussed. A 
totem is a class of material objects which a savage 

$4 



1912X 13/108 



regards with superstitious respect, believing that there 
exists between him and every member of the class an 
intimate and special relation. There are at least 3 kinds 
of totems: 1) the clan totem, common to a whole clan, 
and passing by inheritance from generation to genera- 
tion; 2) the sex totem, common either to all the males or 
to all the females of a tribe, to the exclusion in either 
case of the other sex; and 3) the individual totem, 
belonging to a single individual and not passing to his 
descendants. The clan expects to receive protection and 
care from its totem. The appearance of the totem in or 
about a house is often regarded as an omen of death. In 
particularly important circumstances the clansman seeks 
to emphasize his kinship with the totem by making 
himself resemble it externally by dressing in the skin of 
an animal, by incising a picture of the totem upon his 
own body, etc. The social aspect of totemism is 
principally expressed in a severely enforced injunction 
and a sweeping restriction. The members of a totem clan 
are brothers and sisters and are bound to help and 
protect one another. The corresponding taboo restric- 
tion prohibits members of the same clan from marrying 
or having sexual intercourse with each other. If we seek 
to penetrate to the original nature of totemism, we find 
that its essential characteristics are these: originally, all 
totems were animals, and were regarded as the ancestors 
of the different clans. Totems were inherited only 
through the female line. There was a prohibition against 
killing the totem. Members of a totem clan were 
forbidden to practice sexual intercourse with one 
another. 

1912X 13/108 

Taboo and totem (1913). Part IV. The return of 
totemism in children. (2). The origin of totemism; the 
origin of exogamy and its relation to totemism. 

The published theories on the origin of totemism are 
divided into 3 groups: the nominalist, the sociological, 
and the psychological. Some of the explanations of 
totemism exclude any connection with exogamy, so that 
the 2 institutions fall completely apart. There are 2 
opposing views: one which seeks to maintain the original 
presumption that exogamy forms an inherent part of the 
totemic system, and the other which denies that there is 
any such connection and holds that the convergence 
between these 2 features of the oldest cultures is a 
chance one. Most of the authorities agree that totemism 
is older than exogamy. The view which explains horror 
of ircest as an innate instinct must be abandoned. Not 
only must the prohibition against incest be older than 
any domestication of animals which might have enabled 
men to observe the effects of inbreeding upon racial 
characters, but even today the detrimental results of 
inbreeding are not established with certainty and cannot 
easily be demonstrated in man. 



1912X 13/126 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part IV. The return of 
totemism in childhood. (3). Animal phobias. (4). Sacrifi- 
cial feasts. 

There is a great deal of resemblance between the 
relations of children and of primitive men towards 
animals. Not infrequently, a strange rift occurs in the 
excellent relations between children and animals. A child 
will suddenly begin to be frightened of some particular 
species of animal and to avoid touching or seeing any 
individual of that species. This is due to a displacement 
of affect. Analysis is able to trace the associative paths 
along which the displacement passes, both the fortuitous 
paths and those with a significant content. Analysis also 
enables us to discover the motives for the displacement. 
It may be said that in these children’s phobias some of 
the features of totemism reappear, but reversed into 
their negative. If the totem animal is the father, then the 
2 principal ordinances of totemism, the 2 taboo prohibi- 
tions which constitute its core, not to kill the totem and 
not to have sexual relations with a woman of the same 
totem, coincide in their content with the 2 crimes of 
Oedipus, who killed his father and married his mother, 
as well as with the 2 primal wishes of children, the 
insufficient depression or the reawakening of which 
forms the nucleus of perhaps every psychoneurosis. The 
sacramental killing and communal eating of the totem 
animal, whose consumption is forbidden on all other 
occasions, is an important feature of totemic religion. 

1912X 13/140 

Totem and taboo (1913). Part IV. The return of 
totemism in childhood. (5), (6). Relation of totem meals 
to father and God. 

A festival is a permitted, or rather an obligatory, 
excess, a solemn breach of a prohibition. It is not that 
men commit the excess because it is of the essence of a 
festival; the festive feeling is produced by the liberty to 
do what is as a rule prohibited. The clansmen acquire 
sanctity by consuming the totem. Psychoanalysis has 
revealed that the totem animal is in reality a substitute 
for the father; and this tallies with the contradictory fact 
that, though the killing of the animal is as a rule 
forbidden, yet its killing is a festive occasion, with the 
fact that it is killed and yet mourned. Psychoanalysis 
requires us to assume that totemism and exogamy were 
intimately connected and had a simultaneous origin. The 
ancient totem meal recurs in the original form of 
sacrifice. It is supposed that the god himself was the 
totem animal, and that he developed out of it at a later 
state of religious feeling. As time went on, the animal 
lost its sacred character and the sacrifice lost its 
connection with the totem feast; it became a simple 
offering to the deity, an act of renunciation in favor of 




1913J 13/176 



the god. We can trace through the ages the identity of 
the totem meal with animal sacrifice, with the anthropic 
human sacrifice and with the Christian Eucharist, and we 
can recognize in all these rituals the effect of the crime 
by which men were so deeply weighted down but of 
which they must none the less have felt so proud. The 
Christian communion, however, is essentially a fresh 
elimination of the father, a repetition of the guilty deed. 

1912X 13/155 

Totem and Taboo (1913). Part IV. Return of totemism 
in childhood. (7). Oedipus complex and society. 

An event such as the elimination of the primal father 
by the company of his sons must inevitably have left 
ineradicable traces in the history of humanity; and the 
less it itself was recollected, the more numerous must 
have been the substitutes to which it gave rise. The 
beginnings of religion, morals, society, and art converge 
in the Oedipus complex. This is in complete agreement 
with the psychoanalytic findings that the same complex 
constitutes the nucleus of all neuroses, so far as our 
present knowledge goes. It seems that the problems of 
social psychology should prove soluble on the basis of 
one single concrete point: man’s relation to his father. 
No one can have failed to observe that the existence of a 
collective mind is taken as the basis of the position. It is 
supposed that the sense of guilt for an action has 
persisted for many thousands of years and has remained 
operative in generations which can have had no knowl- 
edge of that action. Without the assumption of a 
collective mind, social psychology in general cannot 
exist. Another difficulty might actually be brought 
forward from psychoanalytic quarters. The earliest 
moral precepts and restrictions in a primitive society 
have been explained as reactions to a deed which gave 
those who performed it the concept of crime. They felt 
remorse for the deed and decided that it should never be 
repeated. This creative sense of guilt still persists among 
us. 

1913J 13/165 

The claims of psycho-analysis to scientific interest 
(1913). Part I. The psychological interest of psycho- 
analysis. 

Psychoanalysis is a medical procedure which aims at 
the cure of certain forms of nervous disease (the 
neuroses) by a psychological technique. There are a large 
number of phenomena related to facial and other 
expressive movements and to speech, as well as many 
processes of thought, which have hitherto escaped the 
notice of psychology. What Freud means are parapraxes, 
haphazard actions and dreams in normal people, and 
convulsive attacks, deliria, visions, and obsessive ideas or 
acts in neurotic subjects. The commonest motive for 



suppressing an intention is the avoidance of unpleasure. 
The explanation of parapraxes owes its theoretical value 
to the ease with which they can be solved and their 
frequency in normal people. The interpretation of 
dreams brought psychoanalysis into conflict with official 
science. Medical research explains dreams as purely 
somatic phenomena. Psychoanalysis has demonstrated 
that all dreams have a meaning. Psychoanalysis raises the 
status of dreams into that of psychical acts possessing 
meaning and purpose, and having a place in the subject’s 
mental life, and thus disregards their strangeness, inco- 
herence, and absurdity. Dream work brings about the 
distortion which makes the dream thoughts unrecogniz- 
able in the content of the dream. All dreams involve 
wish fulfillment. The dream work compels us to assume 
the existence of an unconscious psychical activity which 
is more comprehensive and more important than the 
familiar activity that is linked with consciousness. 
Psychoanalysis ascribes the primacy in mental life to 
affective processes, and it reveals an unexpected amount 
of affective disturbance and blinding of the intellect, in 
normal, no less than in sick people. 



1913J 13/176 

The claims of psycho-analysis to scientific interest 
(1913). Part II. The claims of psycho-analysis to the 
interest of the non-psychological sciences. (A), (B), (C). 
The philological, philosophical and biological interest of 
psychoanalysis. 

The interpretation of dreams is analogous to the 
decipherment of an ancient pictographic script. In both 
cases there are certain elements which are not intended 
to be interpreted but are only designed to serve as 
determinatives, that is to establish the meaning of some 
other element. The language of dreams may be looked 
upon as the method by which unconscious mental 
activity expresses itself. Philosophy will be unable to 
avoid taking the psychoanalytic contributions to psy- 
chology fully into account and reacting to this new 
enrichment in our knowledge. Psychoanalysis can indi- 
cate the subjective and individual motives behind philo- 
sophical theories which have ostensibly sprung from 
impartial logical work, and can draw a critic’s attention 
to the weak spots in the system. Psychoanalysis has done 
justice to the sexual function in man by making a 
detailed examination of its importance in mental and 
practical life. Sexual interests and activities are present 
in the human child at almost every age and from the 
first. The normal sexuality of adults emerges from 
infantile sexuality by a series of developments, combina- 
tions, divisions and suppressions, which are scarcely ever 
achieved with ideal perfection and consequently leave 
behind predispositions to a retrogression of the function 
in the form of illness. 



87 

86 



455-582 0 - 72-7 



I. 



1913J 13/182 
1913J 13/182 

The claims of psycho-analysis to scientific interest 
(1913). Part II. The claims of psycho-analysis to the 
interest of the non-psychological sciences. (D). The 
interest of psycho-analysis from a developmental point 
of view. (E), (F), (G), (H). 

Psychoanalysis has been obliged to derive the mental 
life of adults from that of children, and has had to take 
seriously the old saying that the child is father to the 
man. Some notable discoveries have been made in the 
course of the investigation of the infantile mind includ- 
ing the extraordinarily important influence exerted by 
the impressions of childhood on the whole course of 
later development. In spite of all the later development 
that occurs in the adult, none of the infantile mental 
formations perish. It seems quite possible to apply the 
psychoanalytic views derived from dreams to products 
of ethnic imagination such as myths and fairy tales. 
Psychoanalysis has established an intimate connection 
between psychical achievements of individuals and soci- 
eties by postulating one and the same dynamic source 
for both of them. The principal function of the mental 
mechanism is to relieve the individual from the tensions 
created in him by his needs. An investigation of 
primitive peoples shows mankind in a childish belief in 
its own omnipotence. Art constitutes a region halfway 
between a reality which frustrates wishes and the wish 
fulfilling world of the imagination, a region in which, as 
it were, primitive man’s strivings for omnipotence are 
still in full force. Social feelings (the emotional basis of 
the relation of the individual to society) invariably 
contain an erotic element. In general, the neuroses are 
asocial in their nature. They always aim at driving the 
individual out of society and at replacing the safe 
monastic seclusion of earlier days by the isolation of 
illness. Psychoanalysis fully demonstrates the part 
played by social conditions and requirements in the 
causation of neurosis. Psychoanalysis has brought to 
light the wishes, the thought structures, and the develop- 
mental processes of childhood, thus allowing better 
insight into educational methods. When educators 
become familiar with the findings of psychoanalysis they 
will not overestimate the importance of the socially 
unserviceable or perverse instinctual impulses which 
emerge in children but will refrain from forcibly 
suppressing such impulses (knowing that suppression 
often results in worse results). To forcibly suppress these 
impulses results in repression, which establishes a predis- 
position to later nervous illness. 

1913H 13/193 

Observations and examples from analytic practice 
(1913). 

Observations and examples from analytic practice are 
presented. Twenty-two different dreams are piesented. 



They include: a dream with an unrecognized precipi- 
tating cause ; the time of day in dreams which stands for 
the age of the dreamer at some particular period in his 
childhood; the representation of ages in dreams; the 
position when waking from a dream; 2 rooms (the 
female genitals) being made into 1 room; an overcoat as 
a symbol for a man; disgraced feet (shoes); considera- 
tions of representability; dreams about dead people; 
fragmentary dreams; self-criticism by neurotics; and the 
appearance in the dream of the symptoms of the illness. 

1914A 13/201 

Fausse reconnaissance (‘deja raconte’) in psycho-analytic 
treatment (1914). 

It not infrequently happens in the course of an 
analytic treatment that the patient, after reporting some 
fact that he has remembered, will go on to say that he 
has already said that, while the analyst himself feels sure 
that this is the first time he has heard the story. The 
explanation of this frequent occurrence appears to be 
that the patient really had an intention of giving this 
information, that once or even several times he actually 
made some remark leading up to it, but that he was then 
prevented by resistance from carrying out his purpose, 
and afterwards confused a recollection of his intention 
with a recollection of its performance. The phenomenon 
presented by the patient in cases like this deserves to be 
called a fausse reconnaissance, and is completely analo- 
gous to what occurs in certain other cases and has been 
described as a deja vu. There is another kind of fausse 
reconnaissance which not infrequently makes its appear- 
ance at the close of a treatment. After he has succeeded 
in forcing the repressed event upon the patient’s 
acceptance in the teeth of all resistances, and has 
succeeded, as it were, in rehabilitating it, the patient 
may say that he now feels as though he had known it all 
the time. With this, the work of the analysis has been 
completed. 

1914B 13/209 

The Moses of Michelangelo (1914). Part I. Description of 
critics. 

Descriptions by various critics of the Moses of 
Michelangelo, a fragment of the gigantic tomb which the 
artist was to have erected for the powerful Pope Julius 
the Second, is presented. There is not the slightest doubt 
that it represents Moses holding the Tables of the Ten 
Commandments. Moses is represented as seated; his 
body faces forward, his head with its mighty beard looks 
to the left, his right foot rests on the ground and his left 
leg is raised so that only the toes touch the ground. The 
facial expression of Moses is characterized as showing a 
mixture of wrath, pain, and contempt. A majority of 
critics describe the statue as the descent from Mount 
Sinai, where Moses has received the Tables from God, 



o 

ERIC 




88 



1914D 14/3 



and it is the moment when he perceives that the people 
are rejoicing around the Golden Calf. The figure of 
Moses cannot be supposed to be springing to his feet; 
but is in sublime repose like the other figures and like 
the proposed statue of the Pope. Without the display of 
the emotions of anger, contempt and pain it would not 
have been possible to portray the nature of a superman 
of this kind. Michelangelo has created, not a historical 
figure, but a character type, embodying an inexhaustible 
inner force which tames the recalcitrant world; and he 
has given a form not only to the Biblical narrative of 
Moses, but to his own inner experiences, and to his 
impressions both of the individuality of Julius himself, 
and also, of the underlying springs of Savonarola’s 
perpetual conflicts. 

19I4B 13/222 

The Moses of Michelangelo (1914). Part II. Freud’s 
description. 

In 2 places in the figure of Moses there are certain 
details which have hitherto not only escaped notice but 
have not even been properly described. These are the 
attitude of his right hand and the position of the 2 
Tables of the Law. The thumb of the hand is concealed 
and the index finger alone is in effective contact with 
the beard. It is pressed so deeply against the soft masses 
of hair that they bulge out beyond it both above and 
below. We have assumed that the right hand was, to 
begin with, away from the beard; that then it reached 
across to the left of the figure in a moment of great 
emotional tension and seized the beard; that it was 
finally drawn back again, taking a part of the beard with 
it. There are some difficulties involved in this interpreta- 
tion since the right hand is responsible for the tables 
which are upside down. The Tables are stood on their 
heads and practically balanced on one corner. The upper 
edge is straight, the lower one has a protuberance like a 
horn on the part nearest the viewer, and the Tables 
touch the stone seat precisely with this protuberance. It 
is to prevent the Tables from hitting the ground that the 
right hand retreated, let go the beard, a part of which 
was drawn back with it unintentionally, came against the 
upper edge of the Tables in time and held them near the 
hind comer, which had now come uppermost. Thus the 
singularly constrained air of the whole, beard, hand, and 
tilted Tables, can be traced to that one passionate 
movement of the hand and its natural consequences. 

1914B 13/229 
1927B 

The Moses of Michelangelo (1914). Part III, IV, and 
postscript. 

In his first transport of fury, Moses desired to act, to 
spring up and take vengeance and forget the Tables; but 
he has overcome the temptation, and he will not remain 



seated and still, in his frozen wrath and in his pain 
mingled with contempt. Nor will he throw away the 
Tables so that they will break on the stones, for it is on 
their especial account that he has controlled his anger ; it 
was to preserve them that he kept his passion in check. 
As our eyes travel down it, the figure exhibits 3 distinct 
emotional strata. The lines of the face reflect the feelings 
which have won the ascendancy; the middle of the figure 
shows the traces of suppressed movement; and the foot 
still retains the attitude of the projected action. The 
Moses of legend and tradition had a hasty temper and 
was subject to fits of passion. But Michelangelo placed a 
different Moses on the tomb of the Pope, one superior 
to the historical or traditional Moses. In his creations 
Michelangelo has often enough gone to the utmost limit 
of what is expressible in art ; and perhaps in his statue of 
Moses he has not completely succeeded, if his purpose 
was to make the passage of a violent gust of passion 
visible in the signs left behind it in the ensuing calm. 

1914F 13/241 

Some reflections on schoolboy psychology (1914). 

Some reflections on schoolboy psychology are pre- 
sented. Psychoanalysis has taught that the individual’s 
emotional attitudes to other people, which are of such 
extreme importance to his later behavior, are already 
established at an unexpectedly early age. The nature and 
quality of the human child’s relations lo people of his 
own and the opposite sex have already been laid down in 
the first 6 years of his life. Of all the images of a 
childhood which, as a rule, is no longer remembered, 
none is more important for a youth or a man than that 
of his father. In the second half of childhood, a change 
sets in in the boy’s relation to his father. He finds that 
his father is no longer the mightiest, wisest, and richest 
of beings. It is in this pahse of a youth’s development 
that he comes into contact with his teachers. These men, 
not all of whom were in fact fathers themselves, become 
the substitute fathers. That was why, even though they 
were still quite young, they struck us as so mature and 
so unattainably adult. 



VOL. XIV A History of the Psycho-Analytic 
Movement, Papers on Metapsychology and 
Other Works (1914-1916) 

1914D 14/3 

On the history of the psycho-analytic movement (1914). 
Editor’s note (1957). 

The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement was 
written in 1914. The aim of the paper was to state 
clearly the fundamental postulates and hypotheses of 
psychoanalysis, to show that the theories of Adler and 



89 



o 

ERIC 



98 



1914D 14/7 

Jung were totally incompatible with them, and to draw 
the inference that it would lead to nothing but general 
confusion if these contradictory sets of views were all 
given the same name. In order to make the essential prin- 
ciples of psychoanalysis perfectly plain, Freud traced the 
history of their development from their preanalytic 
beginnings. 

1914D 14/7 

On the history of the psycho-analytic movement (1914). 
Part I. Early history. Freud working alone. 

Psychoanalysis is Freud’s creation; for 10 years he 
was the only person who concerned himself with it, and 
all the dissatisfaction which the new phenomenon 
aroused in his contemporaries has been poured out in 
the form of criticisms on his head. In 1909, in the 
lecture room of an American University, Freud had his 
first opportunity of speaking in public about 
psychoanalysis. The theory of repression is the corner 
stone on which the whole structure of psychoanalysis 
rests. It is the most essential part of it; and yet it is 
nothing but a theoretical formulation of a phenomenon 
which may be observed as often as one pleases if one 
undertakes an analysis of a neurotic without resorting to 
hypnosis. In such cases, one comes across a resistance 
which opposes the work of analysis and in order to 
frustrate it pleads a failure of memory. The history of 
psychoann'ysis proper, therefore, only begins with the 
new technique that dispenses with hypnosis. The 
theoretical consideration of the fact that this resistance 
coincides with an amnesia leads inev^ibly to the view of 
unconscious mental activity which is peculiar to 
psychoanalysis and which, too, distinguishes it quite 
clearly from philosophical speculation about the 
unconscious. It may be said that the theory of 
psychoanalysis is an attempt to account for 2 striking 
and unexpected facts of observation which emerge 
whenever an attempt is made to trace the symptoms of a 
neurotic back to their sources in his past life: the facts 
of transference and of resistance. Another product of 
psychoanalytic work is the hypothesis of infantile 
sexuality, a theoretical inference legitimately drawn 
from innumberable observations. At first, Freud felt that 
patients’ descriptions of infantile sexual traumas were 
based on reality, only later finding that such traumatic 
scenes were usually created in phantasy (becoming part 
of psychic reality). 

1914D 14/25 

On the history of the psycho-analytic movement (1914). 
Part II. The early psychoanalytic movement. 

From Ihe year 1902 onwards, a number of young 
doctors gathered round Freud with the express intention 
of learning, practicing and spreading the knowledge of 
psychoanalysis. The small circle soon expanded, and in 



the course of the next few years often changed its 
composition. In 1907, it appeared that psychoanalysis 
had unobtrusively awakened interest and gained friends, 
and that there were even some scientific workers who 
were ready to acknowledge it. Freud repeatedly 
acknowledged with gratitude the great services rendered 
by the Zurich School of Psychiatry in the spread of 
psychoanalysis, particularly by Bleuler and Jung. In 
Jung’s work on occult phenomena, published in 1902, 
there was already an allusion to Freud’s book on dream 
interpretation. In the years following 1907, when the 
schools of Vienna and Zurich were united, 
psychoanalysis made the extraordinary surge forward of 
which the momentum is felt even today; this is shown 
by the spread of psychoanalytic literature and by the 
constant increase in the number of doctors who are 
practicing or studying it, as well as by the frequency of 
the attacks made on it at Congresses and in learned 
societies. Hand in hand with the expansion of 
psychoanalysis in space went an expansion in content ; it 
extended from the field of the neuroses and psychiatry 
to other fields of knowledge. Another path led from the 
investigation of dreams to the analysis of works of 
imagination and ultimately to the analysis of their 
creators. 

1914D 14/42 

On the history of the psycho-analytic movement (1914). 
Part III. Departures of Jung and Adler. 

Two years after the first private Congress of 
psychoanalysis, the second took place at Nuremberg in 
March, 1910. Freud considered it necessary to form an 
official association because he feared the abuses to 
which psychoanalysis would be subjected as soon as it 
became popular. At this Congress, 3 local groups were 
constituted: one in Berlin, under the chairmanship of 
Abraham; one in Zurich, whose head had become the 
President of the whole Association; and one in Vienna, 
the direction of which Freud made over to Adler. Two 
secessions took place which caused Freud unhappiness: 
Adler and Jung. The Adlerian theory was a system which 
emphasized the egoistic constituent in libidinal 
instinctual impulses. Adler’s secession took place before 
the Weimar Congress in 1911. In 1912, Jung boasted 
that his modifications of psychoanalysis had overcome 
the resistances of many people. Jung’s arguments rest on 
the optimistic assumption that the progress of the 
human race has always pursued an unbroken line. The 
development of the periodicals devoted to 
psychoanalysis was traced. The first was a series of 
monographs entitled Papers on Applied Mental Science; 
the second was the Yearbook for Psychoanalytic and 
Psychopathological Researches; the third was the 
International Journal for Medical Psychoanalysis and the 
fourth was Imago. The first task confronting 



90 






99 



1914C 14/92 



psychoanalysis was to explain the neuroses; it used the 2 
facts of resistance and transference as starting points, 
and, taking into consideration the third fact of amnesia, 
accounted for them with its theories of repression, 
sexual motive forces in neurosis, and the unconscious. 

1914C 14/67 

On narcissism: an introduction (1914). Editor’s note. 
(1957). 

On Narcissism: an Introduction is among the most 
important of Freud’s writings and may be regarded as 
one of the pivots in the evolution of his views. It sums 
up his earlier discussions on the subject of narcissism and 
considers the place taken by narcissism in sexual 
development; but it goes far beyong this. For it enters 
into the deeper problems of the relations between the 
ego and external objects, and it draws the new 
distinction between ego libido and object libido. 
Furthermore, most important of all, perhaps, it 
introduces the concepts of the ego ideal and of the 
self-observing agency related to it, which were the basis 
of what was ultimately to be described as the super ego. 
In addition to all this, at 2 points in the paper it touches 
upon the controversies with Adler and Jung. One of 
Freud’s motives in writing this paper was, no doubt, to 
show that the concept of narcissism offers an alternative 
to Jung’s nonsexual libido and to Adler’s masculine 
protest. 

1914C 14/73 

On narcissism: an introduction (1914). Part I. Discussion 
of narcissism in various conditions. 

The term narcissism is derived from clinical 
description and was chosen by Paul Nacke in 1899 to 
denote the attitude of a person who treats his own body 
in the same way in which the body of a sexual object is 
ordinarily treated. Psychoanalytic observers were 
subsequently struck by the fact that individual features 
of the narcissistic attitude are found in many people 
who suffer from other disorders; it seemed probable that 
an allocation of the libido such as described as narcissism 
might be present far more extensively, and that it might 
claim a place in the regular course of human sexual 
development. A pressing motive for occupying ourselves 
with the conception of a primary and normal narcissism 
arose when the attempt was made to subsume what we 
know of dementia parecox or schizophrenia under the 
hypotheses of the libido theory. The extension of the 
libido theory receives reinforcement from our 
observations and views on the mental life of children and 
primitive peoples. A unity comparable to the ego cannot 
exist in the individual from the start; the ego has to be 
developed. The autoerotic instincts, however, are there 
from the first; so there must be something added to 



autoeroticism, a new psychical action, in order to bring 
about narcissism. Freud concluded that we may 
repudiate Jung’s assertion that the libido theory has 
come to grief in the attempt to explain dementia 
praecox, and that it is therefore disposed of for the other 
neuroses as well. 

1914C 14/82 

On narcissism: an introduction (1914). Part II. 
Narcissism in organic disease, hypochondria, and erotic 
life. 

Certain special difficulties seem to lie in the way of a 
direct study of narcissism. The chief means of access to 
it will probably remain in the analysis of the 
paraphrenias. Hypochondria, like organic disease, 
manifests itself in distressing and painful bodily 
sensations, and it has the same effect as organic 
disease cn the distribution of libido. The hypochondriac 
withdraws both interest and libido from the objects of 
the external world and concentrates both of them upon 
the organ that is engaging his attention. The difference 
between paraphrenic affections, and the transference 
neuroses appears to lie the circumstance that, in the 
former, the libido that is liberated by frustration does 
not remain attached to objects in phantasy, but 
withdraws on to the ego. Megalomania would 
accordingly correspond to the psychical mastering of this 
latter amount of libido, and would thus be the 
counterpart of the introversion on to phantasies that is 
found in the transference neuroses; a failure of this 
psychical function gives rise to the hypochondria of 
paraphrenia and this is homologous to the anxiety of the 
transference neuroses. Since paraphrenia frequently, if 
not usually, brings about only a partial detachment of 
the libido from objects, we can distinguish 3 groups of 
phenomena in the clinical picture: 1) those representing 
what remains of a normal state of neurosis; 2) those 
representing the morbid process; and 3) those 
representing restoration, in which the libido is once 
more attached to objects, after the manner of a hysteria, 
or of an obsessional neurosis. 

1914C 14/92 

On narcissism: an introduction (1914). Part III. 
Ego-ideal, inheritor of narcissism. 

Psychoanalytic research has recognized the existence 
and importance of the masculine protest, but it has 
regarded it, in opposition to Adler, as narcissistic in 
nature and derived from the castration complex. We 
have learned that libidinal instinctual impulses undergo 
the vicissitude of pathogenic repression if they come 
into conflict with the subject’s cultural and ethical ideas. 
For the ego, the formation of an ideal is the 
conditioning factor of repression. This ideal ego is the 



91 



ICO 



14/105 



target of the self-love which was enjoyed in childhood 
by the actual ego. Sublimation is a process that concerns 
object libido and consists in the instinct’s directing itself 
towards an other than sexual satisfaction. Idealization is 
a process that concerns the object; by it that object is 
aggrandized and exalted in the subject’s mind. There is a 
special psychical agency which performs the task of 
seeing that narcissistic satisfaction from the ego ideal is 
ensured and constantly watches the actual ego and 
measures it by that ideal. Delusions of being watched 
present this power (watching, discovering, criticizing) in 
a regressive form, revealing the origin of the ego-ideal. 
Self-regard appears to be an expression of the size of the 
ego. The self-regarding attitude is discussed for normal 
and neurotic people. The relations of self-regard to 
erotism (libidinal object-cathexes) may be expressed 
after 2 cases are distinguished: whether the erotic 
cathexes are ego-syntonic or have suffered repression. 
The development of the ego consists in a departure from 
primary narcissism and gives rise to a vigorous attempt 
to recover that stage. This departure is brought about by 
means of the displacement of libido on to an ego ideal 
imposed from without ; and satisfaction is brought about 
from fulfilling this ideal. The auxiliary relation of the 
sexual ideal to the ego ideal is discussed. The ego ideal 
binds not only a person’s narcissistic libido, but also a 
considerable amount of his homosexual libido, which is 
in this way turned back into the ego. 

14/105 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). Editor’s introduction 
(1957). 

Freud published his first extended account of his 
views on psychological theory in the seventh chapter of 
The Interpretation of Dreams. The 5 Papers on 
Metapsychology form an interconnected series. They 
were all written in a period of some 7 weeks between 
March 15 and May 4, 1915. He wrote 7 other papers, 
too, but they were never published and it seems 
probable that Freud destroyed them. The subjects with 
which 5 of the last 7 papers dealt were: consciousness, 
anxiety, conversion hysteria, obsessional neurosis, and 
the transference neuroses in general. The collection of 
12 papers would have been a comprehensive one, dealing 
with the underlying processes in most of the principal 
neuroses and psychoses as well as in dreams, with the 
mental mechanisms of repression, sublimation, 
introjection, and projection, and with the 2 mental 
systems of consciousness and the unconscious. 

1915C 14/111 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). Instincts and their 
vicissitudes (1915). Editor's note (1957). 

In Instincts and their Vicissitudes, Freud describes an 
instinct as a concept on the frontier between the mental 



and the somatic, the psychical representative of the 
stimuli originating from within the organism and 
reaching the mind. In a number of passages, Freud 
expressed his dissatisfaction with the state of 
psychological knowledge about the instincts. The 
instincts make their appearance at a comparatively late 
point in the sequence of his writings. But the instincts 
were there under other names. Their place was taken, to 
a great extent, by such things as excitations, affective 
ideas, wishful impulses, endogenous stimuli, and so on. 

1915C 14/117 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). Instincts and their 
vicissitudes (1915). 

The vicissitudes of instincts are discussed. By the 
pressure of an instinct, we understand its motor factor, 
the amount of force or the measure of the demand for 
work which it represents. The aim of an instinct is in 
every instance satisfaction, which can only be obtained 
by removing the state of stimulation at the source of the 
instinct. The object of an instinct is the thing in regard 
to which or through which the instinct is able to achieve 
its aim. By the source of an instinct is meant the somatic 
process which occurs in an organ or part of the body and 
whose stimulus is represented in mental life by an 
instinct. The essential feature in the vicissitudes 
undergone by instincts lies in the subjection of the 
instinctual impulses to the influence of the 3 great 
polarities that dominate mental life. Of these 3 
polarities, we might describe that of activity-passivity as 
the biological; that of ego-external world as real; and 
finally that of pleasure-unpleasure as the economic 
polarity. 

1915D 14/141 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). Repression (1915). 
Editor’s note (1957). 

In his History of the Psychoanalytic Movement Freud 
declared that the theory of repression is the cornerstone 
on which the whole structure of psychoanalysis rests. 
The concept of repression goes back historically to the 
very beginning of psychoanalysis. In the account given in 
the Studies on Hysteria, the term actually used to 
describe the process is not repression, but defense. The 
form of repression which Freud had chiefly in mind here 
was that which occurs in hysteria. The special problem 
of the nature of the motive force which puts repression 
into operation was one which was a constant source of 
concern to Freud, though it is scarcely touched on in the 
present paper. In particular, there was the question of 
the relation between repression and sex, and. to this, 
Freud in his early days gave fluctuating replies. 
Subsequently, however, he firmly rejected any attempt 
at sexualizing repression. 



r 



92 



101 



1915E 14/172 



*. 



1915D 14/146 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). Repression (1915). 

One of the vicissitudes an instinctual impulse may 
undergo is to meet with resistances which seek to make 
it inoperative. Under certain conditions, the impulse 
then passes into the state of repression. Repression is a 
preliminary stage of condemnation, something between 
flight and condemnation ; it is a concept which could not 
have been formulated before the time of psychoanalytic 
studies. Repression does not arise in cases where the 
tension produced by lack of satisfaction of an instinctual 
impulse is raised to an unbearable degree, it has become 
a condition for repression that the motive force of 
unpleasure shall have acquired more strength than the 
pleasure obtained from satisfaction. Repression is not a 
defensive mechanism which is present from the 
beginning. The essence of repression lies simply in 
turning something away, and keeping it at a distance, 
from the conscious. We have reason to assume that there 
is a primal repression, a first phase of repression, which 
consists in the psychical representative of the instinct 
being denied entrance into the conscious. The second 
stage of repression, repression proper, affects conscious 
mental derivatives of the repressed representative, or 
such conscious trains of thought as, originating 
elsewhere, have come into associative connection with it. 
The motive and purpose of repression is nothing else 
than the avoidance of unpleasure. The mechanism of 
repression does not coincide with the mechanisms of 
forming substitutes. The mechanisms of repression have 
at least this one thing in common: a withdrawal of the 
cathexis of energy. 



1915E 14/159 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). The unconscious 
(1915). Editor’s note (1957). 

The concept of the existence of unconscious mental 
processes is one that is fundamental to psychoanalytic 
theory. Freud was never tired of insisting upon the 
arguments in support of it and combating the objections 
to it. Freud’s interest in the assumption was never a 
philosophical one; his interest was a practical one. He 
found that without making that assumption, he was 
unable to explain or even to describe a large variety of 
phenomena which he came across. By making that 
assumption, he found the way open to an immensely 
fertile region of fresh knowledge. In The Interpretation 
of Dreams, the unconscious was established once and for 
all. 



1915E 14/166 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). The unconscious 
(1915). Chapter I. Justification for the concept of the 
unconscious. 

We have learned from psychoanalysis that the essence 
of the process of repression lies, not in putting an end to 
the idea which represents an instinct, but in preventing it 
from becoming conscious. When this happens we say of 
the idea that it is in a state of being unconscious. The 
assumption of the existence of something mental that is 
unconscious is necessary and legitimate. It is necessary 
because the data of consciousness have a very large 
number of gaps in them; both in healthy and in sick 
people, psychical acts often occur which can be 
explained only by presupposing other acts, of which 
nevertheless, consciousness affords no evidence. At any 
given moment consciousness includes only a small 
content, so that the greater part of what we call 
conscious knowledge must be, for very considerable 
periods of time, in a state of latency, that is to say, of 
being psychically unconscious. The assumption of an 
unconscious is, moreover, a perfectly legitimate one, 
inasmuch as in postulating it, we are not departing a 
single step from our customary and generally accepted 
mode of thinking. In psychoanalysis there is no choice 
for us but to assert that mental processes are in 
themselves unconscious, and to liken the perception of 
them by means of consciousness to the perception of the 
external worid by means of the sense organs. 



1915E 14/172 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). The unconscious 
(1915). Chapter II. Various meanings of ‘The 
Unconscious’-The topographical point of view. 

The attribute of being unconscious (Ucs) is only one 
feature that is found in the psychical and is by no means 
sufficient to characterize it fully. The unconscious 
comprises acts which are merely latent, temporarily 
unconscious, but which differ in no other respect from 
conscious ones. A psychical act goes through 2 phases as 
regards its state, between which is interposed a kind of 
testing (censorship). In the first place the psychical act is 
unconscious and belongs to the system Ucs; if, on 
testing, it is rejected by the censorship, it is not allowed 
to pass into the second phase; it is then said to be 
repressed and must remain unconscious. If, however, it 
passes this testing, it enters the second phase and 
henceforth belongs to the second system, the conscious 
(Cs) system. It is not yet conscious, but it is capable of 
becoming conscious. In consideration of this capacity 
for becoming conscious we also call the system Pcs the 
preconscious. 



93 



102 



191 5E 14/177 



191 5E 14/177 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). The unconscious 
(1915). Chapter III. Unconscious emotions. 

The antithesis of conscious and unconscious is not 
applicable to instincts. An instinct can never become an 
object of consciousness, only the idea that represents the 
instinct can. Even in the unconscious, moreover, an 
instinct cannot be represented otherwise than by an 
idea. If the instinct did not attach itself to an idea or 
manifest itself as an affective state we could know 
nothing about it. The use of the terms “unconscious 
affect” and “unconscious emotion” has reference to the 
vicissitudes undergone, in consequence of repression, by 
the quantitative factor in the instinctual impulse. We 
know that 3 such vicissitudes are possible: either the 
affect remains, wholly or in part, as it is; or it is 
transformed into a qualitatively different quota of 
affect, above all into anxiety; or it is suppressed, ie., it is 
prevented from developing at all. In every instance 
where repression has succeeded in inhibiting the 
development of affects, we term those affects (which we 
restore when we undo the work of repression) 
unconscious. It is possible for the development of affect 
to proceed directly from the unconscious system; in that 
case the affect always has the character of anxiety, for 
which all repressed affects are exchanged. Often, 
however, the instinctual impulse has to wait until it has 
found a substitutive idea in the conscious system. The 
development of affect can then proceed from this 
conscious substitute, and the nature of that substitute 
determines the qualitative character of the affect. 

191 5E 14/180 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). The unconscious 
(1915). Chapter IV. Topography and dynamics of 
repression. 

Repression is essentially a process affecting ideas on 
the border between the unconscious (Ucs) system and 
the preconscious (Pcs) or conscious (Cs). The idea either 
remains uncathected, or receives cathexis from the Ucs, 
or retains the Ucs cathexis which it already had. Freud 
proposed that when we have succeeded in describing a 
psychical process in its dynamic, topographical, and 
economic aspects, we should speak of it as a 
metapsychological presentation. In anxiety hysteria a 
first phase of the process is frequently overlooked, and 
may perhaps be in fact missed; on careful observation, 
however, it can be clearly discerned. It consists in 
anxieties appearing without the subject knowing what 
he is afraid of. In trie second phase of anxiety hysteria, 
the anticathexis from the system Cs has led to substitute 
formation. The third phase repeats the work of the 
second on an ampler scale. The system Cs now protects 
itself against the activation of the substitutive idea by an 
anticathexis of its environment, just as previously it had 



secured itself againsv the emergence of the repressed idea 
by a cathexis of the substitutive idea. A great deal of 
what we have found in anxiety hysteria also holds good 
for the other 2 neuroses. In conversion hysteria, the 
instinctual cathexis of the repressed idea is changed into 
the innervation of the symptom. As regards obsessional 
neurosis, the anticathexis from the system Cs comes 
most noticeably into the foreground. 

1915E 14/186 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). The unconscious 
(1915). Chapter V. The special characteristics of the 
system Ucs. 

The nucleus of the unconscious (Ucs) system consists 
of instinctual representatives which seek to discharge 
their cathexis, the wishful impulses. There is, in this 
system no negation, no doubt, no degree of certainty; all 
this is only introduced by trie work of the censorship 
between the Ucs and the preconscious (Pcs) system. 
Negation is a substitute, at a higher level, for repression. 
In the Ucs there are only contents, cathected with 
greater or lesser strength. The characteristics which we 
may expect to find in processes belonging to the system 
Ucs are: exemption from mutual contradiction, primary 
process (mobility of cathexes), timelessness, and 
replacement of external by psychical cathexes. 
Unconscious processes only become cognizable by us 
under the conditions of dreaming and of neurosis, when 
processes of the Pcs system are set back to an earlier 
stage by regression. TTie processes of the system Pcs 
display an inhibition of the tendency of cathected ideas 
towards discharge. It devolves upon the system Pcs to 
make communication possible between the different 
ideational contents so that they can influence one 
another, to give them an order in time, and to set up a 
censorsriip or serveral censorships. 

191 5E 14/190 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). The unconscious 
(1915). Chapter VI. Communication between the two 
systems. 

The unconscious (Ucs) system is continued into what 
are known as derivatives; it is accessible to the 
impressions of life, it constantly influences the 
preconscious (Pcs) system, and is even, for its part, 
subjected to influences from the Pcs. Among the 
derivatives of the Ucs instinctual impulses, there are 
some which unite in themselves characters of an 
opposite kind. On the one hand, they are highly 
organized, free from self-contradition, have made use of 
every acquisition of the conscious (Cs) system and 
would hardly be distinguished in our judgement from 
the formation of that system. On the other hand, they 
are unconscious and are incapable of becoming 



94 

113 



o 

ERIC 



1917D 14/219 



conscious. A very great part of this preconscious 
originates in the unconscious, has the character of its 
derivatives, and is subjected to a censorship before it can 
become conscious. The Ucs is turned back on the frontier 
of the Pcs, by censorship, but derivatives of the Ucs can 
circumvent this censorship, achieve a high degree of 
organization and reach a certain intensity of cathexis in 
the Pcs. When, however, this intensity is exceeded and 
they try to force themselves into consciousness, they are 
recognized as derivatives of the Ucs and are repressed 
afresh at the new frontier of censorship, between the Pcs 
and the Cs. Thus the first of these censorships is 
exercised against the Ucs itself, and the second against 
its Pcs derivatives. 

1915E 14/196 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). The unconscious 
(1915). Chapter VII. Assessment of the unconscious. 

An assessment of the unconscious is presented. In 
schizophrenia, we observe a number of changes in 
speech. The patient often devotes peculiar care to his 
way of expressing himself. Some reference to bodily 
organs or innervation is often given prominence in the 
content of these remarks. In such symptoms of 
schizophrenia, as are comparable with the substitutive 
formations of hysteria or obsessional neurosis, the 
relation between the substitute and the repressed 
material nevertheless displays peculiarities which would 
surprise us in these 2 forms of neurosis. In 
schizophrenia, words are subjected to the same process 
as that which makes the dream images out of latent 
dream thoughts; to what we have called the primary 
psychical process. They undergo condensation, and by 
means of displacement transfer their cathexes to one 
another in their entirety. The character of strangeness of 
the substitutive formation in schizophrenia is the 
predominance of what has to do with words over what 
has to do with things. The conscious presentation 
comprises the presentation of the thing plus the 
presentation of the word belonging to it, while the 
unconscious presentation is the presentation of the thing 
alone. 

1891B 14/205 
1926G 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). The unconscious 
(1915). Appendix A: Freud and Ewald Hering. 
Appendix B: Psycho-physical parallelism. Appendix C: 
Words and things. 

Among Freud’s seniors in Vienna was the physiologist 
Ewald Hering who offered the young man a post as his 
assistant at Prague in 1884. liering’s influence may have 
contributed to Freud’s views on the unconscious. 
Freud’s earlier views on the relation between the mind 
and the nervous system were greatly influenced by 



Hughlings Jackson. The chain of physiological events in 
the nervous system does not stand in a causal connection 
with the psychical events. The physiological events do 
not cease as soon as the psychical ones begin; on the 
contrary, the physiological chain continues. The final 
section of Freud’s paper on the The Unconscious seems 
to have roots in his early monograph on aphasia (189 1). 
We learn to speak by associating a sound image of a 
word with a sense of the innervation of a word. We learn 
to speak the language of other people by endeavoring to 
make the sound image produced by ourselves as like as 
possible to the one which gave rise to our speech 
innervation. We learn to spell by linking the visual 
images of the letters with new sound images, which for 
their part, must remind us of verbal sounds which we 
already know. We learn to read by linking up in 
accordance with certain rules the succession of 
innervatory and motor word presentations which we 
receive when we speak separate letters, so that new 
motor word presentations arise. There corresponds to 
the word a complicated associative process into which 
the elements of visual, acoustic, and kinesthetic origin 
enter together. A word, however, acquires its meaning 
by being linked to an object presentation. 

1917D 14/219 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). A metapsychological 
supplement to die theory of dreams (1917). 

A Metapsychological Supplement to the Theory of 
Dreams resolves itself largely into a discussion of the 
effects produced by the state of sleep on the different 
systems of the mind. It is the study of dreams wliich has 
taught us what we know of the psychical characteristics 
of the state of sleep. Dreams only show us the dreamer 
in so far as he is not sleeping; nevertheless they are 
bound to reveal, at the same time, characteristics of 
sleep itself. A dream tells us that something was going on 
which tended to interrupt sleep, and it enables us to 
understand in what way it has been possible to fend off 
this interruption. A dream is, therefore, among other 
things, a projection: an externalization of an internal 
process. The narcissism of the state of sleep implies a 
withdrawal of cathexis from all ideas of objects, from 
both the unconscious and the preconscious portions of 
those ideas. The completion of the dream process 
consists in the thought content, regressively transformed 
and worded over into a wishful phantasy, becoming 
conscious as a sense perception; while this is happening 
it undergoes secondary revision, to which every 
perceptual concept is subject. The dream wish is 
hallucinated, and, as a hallucination, meets with belief in 
the reality of its fulfillment. Dreams are a residue of 
mental activity, made possible by the fact that the 
narcissistic stage of sleep has not been able to be 
completely established. In dreams, the withdrawal of 
cathexis affects all systems equally. 



95 

104 



0 



1917E 14/237 



1917E 14/237 

Papers on metapsychology (1915). Mourning and 
melancholia (1917). Editor’s note. (1957). 

Mourning and Melancholia may be regarded as an 
extension of the paper on narcissism which Freud had 
written a year earlier, in 1914. Just as that paper had 
described the workings of the critical agency in cases of 
paranoia, so this one sees the same agency in operation 
in melancholia. The implications of this paper were 
destined to be more important than the explanation of 
the mechanism of one particular pathological state, 
though those implications did not become immediately 
obvious. The material contained here led on to the 
further consideration of the critical agency; and this in 
turn led to the hypothesis of the superego and to a fresh 
assessment of the sense of guilt. Along another line, this 
paper called for an examination of the whole question of 
the nature of identification. Freud seems to have been 
inclined at first to regard it as closely associated with, 
and perhaps dependent on, the oral or cannibalistic 
phase of libidinal development. In Mourning and 
Melancholia, he speaks of identification as a preliminary 
stage of object choice, the first way in which the ego 
picks out an object and adds that the ego wants to 
incorporate this object into itself, and, in accordance 
with the oral or cannibalistic phase of libidinal 
development at which it is, it wants to do so by 
devouring it. What Freud seems later to have regarded as 
the most significant feature of this paper was, however, 
its account of the process by which in melancholia an 
object cathexis is replaced by an identification. 

1917E 14/243 

Papers on Metapsychology (1915). Mourning and 
melancholia (1917). 

Melancholia, whose definition fluctuates even in 
descriptive psychiatry, takes on various clinical forms, 
the grouping together of which into a single unity does 
not seem to be established with certainty; and some of 
these forms suggest somatic rather than psychogenic 
affections. The correlation of melancholia and mourning 
seems justified by the general picture of the 2 
conditions. Mourning is regularly the reaction to the loss 
of a loved person. In some people the same influences 
produce melancholia instead of mou 'ung and we 
consequently suspect them of a pathological disposition. 
The distinguishing mental features of melancholia are a 
profoundly painful dejection, cessation of interest in the 
outside world, loss of the capacity to love, inhibition to 
all activity, and a lowering of the self-regarding feelings 
to a degree that finds utterance in self-reproaches and 
self-reviling, and culminates in a delusional expectation 
of punishment. The disturbance of self-regard is absent 
in mourning; but otherwise the features are the same. 
Melancholia borrows some of its features from 



mourning, and the others from the process of regression 
from narcissistic object choice to narcissism. The most 
remarkable characteristic of melancholia is its tendency 
to change into mania. In mania the ego has recovered 
from loss of the object. This makes available all of the 
anticathexis which the painful suffering of melancholia 
has drawn to itself from the ego and bound. The 
accumulation of cathexis which is at first bound and 
then, after the work of melancholia is finished, becomes 
free and makes mania possible must be linked with 
regression of the libido to narcissism. 

1915F 14/261 

A case of paranoia running counter to the 
psycho-analytic theory of the disease (1915). 

A case of paranoia running counter to the 
psychoanalytic theory of the disease is presented. A 
lawyer consulted Freud about a case which had raised 
some doubts in his mind. A young woman had asked him to 
protect her from the molestations of a man who had 
drawn her into a love affair. She declared that this man 
had abused her confidence by getting unseen witnesses 
to photograph them while they were making love, and 
that by exhibiting these pictures it was now in his power 
to bring disgrace on her and force her to resign the post 
she occupied. The view had already been put forward in 
psychoanalytic literature that patients suffering from 
paranoia are struggling against an intensification of their 
homosexual trends, a fact pointing back to a narcissistic 
object choice. And a further interpretation had been 
made: that the persecutor is at bottom someone whom 
the patient loves or has loved in the past. The girl 
seemed to be defending herself against love for a man by 
directly transforming the lover into a persecutor: there was 
no sign of the influence of a woman, no trace ot a 
struggle against a homosexual attachment. She later 
revealed that her department in the business was under 
the direction of an elderly lady whom she described as 
like her mother. The white-haired elderly superior was a 
substitute for her mother. In spite of his youth, her lover 
had been put in the place of her father. It was the 
strength of her mother complex which had driven the 
patient to suspect a love relationship between these 
ill-matched partners, however unlikely such a 
relationship might be. 

1915B 14/275 

Thoughts for the times on war and death (1915). 
Chapter I. The disillusionment of the war. 

In the confusion of wartime in which we are caught 
up, relying as we must on one-sided information, 
standing too close to the great changes that have already 
taken place or are beginning to, and without a 
glimmering of the future that is being shaped, we 
ourselves are at a loss as to the significance of the 



o 

ERIC 



96 

105 



1916D 14/316 



impressions which press in upon us and as to the value of 
the judgments which we form. We cannot but feel that 
no event has ever destroyed so much that is precious in 
the common possessions of humanity, confused so many 
of the clearest intelligences, or so thoroughly debased 
what is highest. The individual who is not himself a 
combatant feels bewildered in his orientation, and 
inhibited in his powers and activities. Two things in this 
war have aroused our sense of disillusionment: the low 
morality shown externally by states which in their 
internal relations pose as the guardians of moral 
standards, and the brutality shown by individuals whom, 
as participants in the highest human civilization, one 
would not have thought capable of such behavior. 

1915B 14/289 
1915G 

Thoughts for the times on war and death (1915). 
Chapter II. Our attitude towards death. Appendix: 
Letter to Dr. Frederik Van Eeden. 

Our attitude towards death is discussed. To anyone 
who listened to us, we were prepared to maintain that 
death was the necessary outcome of life, that everyone 
owes nature a death and must expect to pay the debt. In 
reality, however, we were accustomed to behave as if it 
were otherwise. We showed an unmistakable tendency to 
put death on one side, to eliminate it from life. The 
civilized adult can hardly entertain the thought of 
another person’s death without seeming to himself 
hardhearted or wicked. This attitude of ours towards 
death has a powerful effect on our lives. Life is 
impoverished, it loses in interest, when the highest stake 
in the game of living, life itself, may not be risked. It is 
evident that war is bound to sweep away this 
conventional treatment of death. Death will no longer be 
denied; we are forced to believe in it. People really die; 
and no longer one by one, but many, often tens of 
thousands, in a single day. Death is no longer a chance 
event. Our unconscious is just as inaccessible to the idea 
of our own death, just as murderously inclined towards 
strangers, just as divided (that is, ambivalent) towards 
those we love, as was primeval man. But how far we have 
moved from this primal state in our conventional and 
cultural attitude towards death. War strips us of the 
latter accretions of civilization, and lays bare the primal 
man in each of us. 

I916A 14/303 
On transience (1916). 

Transience is discussed. The proneness to decay of all 
that is beautiful and perfect can give rise to 2 different 
impulses in the mind. The one leads to the aching 
despondency felt by the young poet, while the other 
leads to rebellion against the fact asserted. Transience 
value is scarcity value in time. Limitation in the 



possibility of an enjoyment raises the value of the 
enjoyment. Mourning over the loss of something that we 
have loved or admired seems so natural to the layman 
that he regards it as self-evident. But to psychologists, 
mourning is a great riddle, one of those phenomena 
which cannot themselves be explained but to which 
other obscurities can be traced back. Mourning cranes to 
a spontaneous end. When it has renounced everything 
that has been lost, then it has consumed itself, and our 
libido is once more free to replace the lost objects by 
fresh ones equally or still more precious. 

1916D 14/311 

Some character-types met with in psycho-analytic work 
(1916). Chapter I. The ‘exceptions’. 

Some character types met with in psychoanalytic 
work are discussed. Psychoanalytic work is continually 
confronted with the task of inducing the patient to 
renounce an immediate and directly attainable yield of 
pleasure. The patient is not asked to renounce all 
pleasure, only such satisfactions as will inevitably have 
detrimental consequences. There are individuals who 
resist such an appeal on a special ground. They say that 
they have renounced enough and suffered enough, and 
have a claim to be spared any further demands; they will 
submit no longer to any disagreeable necessity, for they 
are exceptions and, moreover, intend to remain so. 
There is a common peculiarity in the earlier experiences 
of these patients’ lives. Their neuroses were connected 
with some experience or suffering to which they had 
been subjected in their earliest childhood, one in which 
they could look upon as an unjust disadvantage imposed 
upon them. The privileges that they claimed as a result 
of this injustice, and the rebelliousness it engendered, 
had contributed not a little to intensifying the conflicts 
leading to the outbreak of their neurosis. 

1916D 14/316 

Some character-types met with in psycho-analytic work 
(1916). Chapter II. Those wrecked by success. 



Psychoanalytic work has furnished us with the thesis 
that people fall ill of a neurosis as a result of frustration. 
What is meant is the frustration of the satisfaction of 
their libidinal wishes. For a neurosis to be generated 
there must be a conflict between a person’s libidinal 
wishes and his ego, which is the expression of his instinct 
of self-preservation and which also includes his ideals of 
his personality. Privation, frustration of a real 
satisfaction, is the first condition for the generation of a 
neurosis. There are some people who collapse on 
reaching success: One such person is Shakespeare’s Lady 
Macbeth. An extensive analysis of Lady Macbeth is 
presented. The practicing psychoanalyst knows how 
frequently, or how invarably, a girl who enters a 
household as servant, companion or governess, will 




97 



I. 



191 6D 14/332 

consciously or unconsciously weave a daydream, which 
derives from the Oedipus complex, of the mistress of the 
house disappearing and the master taking the newcomer 
as [us wife in her place. Psychoanalytic work teaches 
that the forces of conscience which induce illness in 
consequence of success, instead of, as normally, in 
consequence of frustration, are closely connected with 
the Oedipus complex, the relation of father and mother 
as perhaps is our sense of guilt in general. 

1916D 14/332 

With in Psychoanalytic work 
(1916). Chapter III. Criminals from a sense of guilt. 

In telling Freud about their early youth, particularly 
before puberty, people who have afterwards often 
become very respectable have informed him of 
forbidden actions which they committed at that time. 
Analytic work brought the surprising discovery that such 
J®???. were done principally because they were 
forbidden, and because their execution was accompanied 
by mental relief for their doer. He was suffering from an 
oppressive feeling of guilt, of which he did not know the 
origin, and after he had committed a misdeed this 
oppression was mitigated. His sense of guilt was at least 
attached to something. These people might be described 
as criminals from a sense of guilt. The preexistence of 
the guilty feeling had been demonstrated by a whole set 
of ot ier manifestations and effects. This obscure sense 
of ,uilt was derived from the Oedipus complex and was 
a reaction to the 2 great criminal intentions of killing the 
father and having sexual relations with the mother. 

1916B 14/337 

A mythological parallel to a visual obsession (1916). 

A mythological parallel to a visual obsession is 
presented. In a patient of about 21 years, the products 
o unconscious mental activity became conscious not 
only m obsessive thoughts but also in obsessive images. 
The 2 could accompany each other or appear 
independently. At one particular time, whenever he saw 
Jus father entering the room, there came into his mind, 
in close connection, an obsessive word and an obsessive 
image. The word was father arse; the accompanying 
image represented his father as the naked lower part of a 
body, provided with arms and legs, but without the head 
or upper part. The genitals were not indicated, and the 
facial features were painted on the abdomen. Father arse 
was soon explained as a jocular Teutonizing of the 
honorific title of patriarch. The obsessive image is an 
obvious caricature. It recalls other representations 
which, with a derogatory end in view, replace a whole 
person by one of his organs; it reminds us, too, of 
unconscious phantasies which lead to the identification 
of the genitals with the whole person, and also of joking 
figures of speech, such as “I am all ears.” According to a 



Greek legend, Demeter came to Eleusis in search of her 
daughter after she had been abducted, and was given 
lodging by Dysaules and his wife Baubo; but in her great 
sorrow she refused to touch food or drink. Thereupon 
her hostess Baubo made her laugh by suddenly lifting up 
her dress and exposing her body. In the excavations at 
Pnene in Asia Minor some terracottas were found which 
represented Baubo. They show the body of a woman 
without a head or chest and with a face drawn on the 

abdomen: the lifted dress frames the face like a crown of 
hair. 

1916C 14/339 

A connection between a symbol and a symptom (1916). 

A connection between a symbol and a symptom is 
proposed. Experience in the analysis of dreams has 
sufficiently well established the hat as a symbol of the 
genital organ, most frequently of the male organ. In 
phantasies and in numerous symptoms the head too 
appears as a symbol of the male genitals. Patients 
suffering from obsessions express an amount of 
abhorrence of and indignation against punishment by 
beheading far greater than they do in the case of any 
other form of death; and in such cases the analyst may 
be led to explain to them that they are treating being 
beheaded as a substitute for being castrated. It may be 
that the symbolic meaning of the hat is derived from 
that of the head, in so far as a hat can be regarded as a 
prolonged, though detachable head. This leads to a 
symptom of obsessional neurotics: when they are in the 
street they are on the look-out to see whether some 
acquaintance will greet them first by taking off his hat (a 
meaning of abasement before the person saluted) or 
whether he seems to be waiting for their salutation. The 
neurotics’ own sensitiveness on the subject of greeting 
therefore means that they are unwilling to show 
themselves less important than the other person thinks 
e is. The resistance of their sensitiveness to 
explanations suggests that a motive related to the 
castration complex is present. 

19191 14/341 

Letter to Dr. Hermine Von Hug-Hellmuth (1919). 

A letter to Dr. Hermine von Hug-Hellmuth is 
presented. The diary of a little girl shows clear and 
truthful views of the mental impulses that characterize 
the development of a girl in our social and cultural 
stratum during the years before puberty. We are shown 
how her feelings grow up out of a childish egoism till 
they reach social maturity; we learn what form is first 
assumed by her relations with her parents and with her 
brothers and sisters and how they gradually gain in 
seriousness and inward feeling; how friendships are made 

and broken; and how the secret of sexual life begins to 
dawn on her. 




98 

10 ? 



1916X 15/40 



VOL. XV Introductory Lectures on 
Psycho-Analysis (Parts I and II) 
( 1915 - 1916 ) 

1916X 15/3 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). 
Editor’s introduction (1963) & prefaces (1917, 1930). 

The Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis had a 
wider circulation than any of Freud’s works except The 
Psychopathology of Everyday Life. Among Freud’s 
works, it is predominantly the expository works that 
appear as lectures. The Introductory Lectures may be 
regarded as stock taking of Freud’s views and the posi- 
tion of psychoanalysis at the time of the first World War. 
The secessions of Adler and Jung were already past his- 
tory, the concept of narcissism was some years old, the 
epoch making case history of the Wolf Man had been 
written a year before the lectures began. In his preface 
to these lectures Freud speaks a little depreciatively of 
the lack of novelty in their contents. But no one, how- 
ever well read in psychoanalytic literature, need feel 
afraid of being bored by them or could fail to find 
plenty in them that is not to be found elsewhere. The 
Introductory Lectures have thoroughly deserved their 
popularity. The Introduction to Psychoanalysis is not 
designed to compete in any way with such general ac- 
counts of this field of knowledge as are already in exist- 
ence. The lectures were delivered in 1916 and 1917. 

1916X 15/15 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
1. Parapraxes (1916). Lecture I: Introduction. 

Psychoanalysis is a procedure for the medical treat- 
ment of neurotic patients. In psychoanalysis, nothing 
takes place in treatment but an interchange of words 
between the patient and the analyst. The patient talks, 
tells of his past experiences and present impressions, 
complains, confesses to his wishes and his emotional 
impulses. The doctor listens, tries to direct the patient’s 
processes of thought, exhorts, forces his attention in 
certain directions, gives him explanations and observes 
the reactions of understanding or rejection which he in 
this way provokes in him. It is true that psychoanalysis 
cannot easily be learned and there are not many people 
who have learned it properly. One learns psychoanalysis 
on oneself, by studying one’s own personality. Psycho- 
analysis tries to give psychiatry its missing psychological 
foundation. It hopes to discover the common ground on 
the basis of which the convergence of physical and men- 
tal disorder will become intelligible. One of the unpopu- 
lar assertions made by psychoanalysis is that mental 
processes are in themselves unconscious and that of all 
mental life, it is only certain individual acts and portions 



that are conscious. The second thesis which psycho- 
analysis puts forward as one of its findings, is an asser- 
tion that instinctual impulses which can only be 
described as sexual, both in the narrower and wider 
sense of the word, play an extremely large and never 
hitherto appreciated part in the causation of nervous and 
mental diseases. 

1916X 15/25 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
I. Parapraxes (1916). Lecture II: Parapraxes. 

Everyone is liable to parapraxes. It may happen, for 
instance, that a person who intends to say something 
may use another word instead (a slip of the tongue), or 
he may do the same thing in writing, and may or may 
not notice what he has done. Another group of these 
phenomena has, as its basis, forgetting, not, however, a 
permanent forgetting but only a temporary one. In a 
third group the temporary character is absent, for in- 
stance in the case of mislaying. I”, addition to all this 
there are particular sorts of errors, in which the tempo- 
rary character is present once more ; for in their instance 
we believe for a time that something is the cas which 
both before and afterwards we know is not so. A man 
who can usually speak correctly may make a slip of the 
tongue 1) if he is slightly indisposed and tired, 2) if he is 
excited, and 3) if he is too much occupied with other 
things. The most usual, and at the same time the most 
striking kinds of slips of the tongue, however, are those 
in which one says the precise opposite of what one in- 
tended to say. Included among the causes of parapraxes 
are relations between sounds, verbal similarity, and the 
influence of word associations. It has repeatedly hap- 
pened that a creative writer has made use of a slip of the 
tongue or some other parapraxis as an instrument for 
producing an imaginative effect. 

1916X 15/40 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
I. Parapraxes (1916). Lecture III. Parapraxes (con- 
tinued). 

There are categories of cases of slips of the tongue in 
which the intention, the sense, of the slip is plainly 
visible. There are those in which what was intended is 
replaced by its contrary. In other cases, where the slip 
does not express the precise contrary, an opposite sense 
can be brought out by it. In other cases, the slip of the 
tongue merely adds a second sense to the one intended. 
Parapraxes are not chance events but serious mental acts; 
they have a sense; they arise from the concurrent action, 
or perhaps the mutually opposing action of 2 different 
intentions. Freud is inclined to think that this is the 
explanation of all cases of slips of the tongue. The for- 
getting of intentions can in general be traced to an op- 
posing current of thought, which is unwilling to carry 



99 

108 



« 



o 

ERIC 

hriiTiUTr>rMi^m 



1916X 15/60 

out the intention. A particularly ambiguous and obscure 
kind of parapraxis is losing and mislaying. We ourselves 
play an intentional part in what is so often the painful 
accident of losing something. Accumulated and com- 
bined parapraxes are the finest flower of their kind. An 
accumulation of these phenomena betrays an obstinacy 
that is scarcely ever a characteristic of chance events but 
fits in well with something intentional. The mutual inter- 
changeability between different species of parapraxes 
demonstrates the important and characteristic meaning 
in parapraxes: the purpose which they serve and which 
can be achieved in the most various ways. 

191 6X 15/60 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 

I. Parapraxes (1916). Lecture IV: Parapraxes (con- 
cluded). 

It is probably the case that every single parapraxis 
that occurs has a sense. Parapraxes are the product of 
mutual interference between 2 different intentions, of 
which one may be called the disturbing intention and 
the other the disturbing one. In a slip of the tongue the 
disturbing intention may be related in its content to the 
disturbed one, in which case it will contradict it or cor- 
rect it or supplement it. Or, the content of the disturb- 
ing intention may have nothing to do with that of the 
disturbed one. Parapraxes are mental acts, in which we 
can detect sense and intention. They come about 
through mutual interference between 2 different inten- 
tions. One of these intentions must have been in some 
way forced back from being put into effect before it can 
manifest itself as a disturbance of the other intention. 
Slips of the pen are closely akin to slips of the tongue. 
Misreading is a psychical situation which differs from 
that in slips of the tongue or pen. The forgetting of 
intentions is unambiguous. Its interpretation is not dis- 
puted. The purpose which disturbs the intention is in 
every instance a counter intention, an unwillingness. The 
forgetting of proper names and foreign names, as well as 
of foreign words, can be traced back to a counter inten- 
tion, which is aimed either directly or indirectly against 
the name concerned. The forgetting of impressions and 
experiences demonstrates the operation of the purpose 
of keeping disagreeable things out of memory. Losing 
and mislaying have in common the fact that there is a 
wish to lose something; they differ in the basis of that 
wish. Bungled actions, like other errors, are often com- 
mitted to fulfill wishes which one ought to deny oneself. 

19I6X 15/83 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 

II. Dreams (1916). Lecture V: Difficulties and first 
approaches. 

Dreams have become a subject of psychoanalytic re- 
search. One thing common to all dreams would seem to 



be that we are asleep during them. Dreaming is evidently 
mental life during sleep, something which has certain 
resemblances to waking mental life but which, on the 
other hand, is distinguished from it by large differences. 
A dream is the manner in which the mind reacts to 
stimuli that impinge upon it in the state of sleep. The 
stimuli can be either internal or external. Dreams do not 
simply reproduce the stimulus; they work it over, they 
make allusions to it, they include it in some context, 
they replace it by something else. Dreams are often 
senseless, confused, and absurd; but there are also sen- 
sible, matter of fact, and reasonable dreams. Daydreams 
are phantasies; they are very general phenomena, ob- 
servable, in healthy as well as in sick people and are 
easily accessible to study in our own mind. 

1916X 15/100 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
II. Dreams (1916). Lecture VI: The premises and tech- 
nique of interpretation. 

Let us take as a premise that dreams are not somatic 
but psychical phenomena. It is quite possible, and highly 
probable indeed, that the dreamer does know what his 
dream means: only he does not know that he knows it 
and for that reason thinks he does not know it. A dream 
differs from a slip of the tongue, among other things in 
the multiplicity of its elements. The dream has to be 
divided into its elements and a separate enquiry has to 
be made into each element. The occurrence of ideas with 
links has been the subject of very instructive ex- 
perimental researches, which have played a notable part 
in the history of psychoanalysis. The school of Wundt 
had introduced what are known as association experi- 
ments, in which a stimulus word is called out to the 
subject and he has the task of replying to it as quickly as 
possible with any reaction that occurs to him. It is then 
possible to study the interval that passes between the 
stimulus and the reaction, the nature of the answer given 
as a reaction, possible errors when the same experiment 
is repeated later, and so on. The associations to the 
dream element will be determined both by the dream 
element and also by the unconscious genuine thing 
behind it. 

1916X 15/113 

Introductory lectures on psycho-therapy (1916-17). Part 
II. Dreams (1916). Lecture VII: The manifest content of 
dreams and the latent dream-thoughts. 

The manifest content of dreams and the latent dream 
thoughts are discussed. A dream as a whole is a distorted 
substitute for something else, something unconscious, 
and the task of interpreting a dream is to discover the 
unconscious material. We must not concern ourselves 
with what the dream appears to tell us, whether it is 
intelligible or absurd, clear or confused, since it cannot 



100 

109 



1916X 15/149 



possibly be the unconscious material we are in search of. 
The work of interpreting can be performed on one’s own 
dreams just as on other people’s. The work of interpret- 
ing dreams is carried out in the face of a resistance, 
which opposes it and of which the critical objections are 
manifestations. This resistance is independent of the 
dreamer’s theoretical conviction. If the resistance is 
small, the substitute cannot be far distant from the un- 
conscious material; but a greater resistance means that 
the unconscious material will be greatly distorted and 
that the path will be a long one from the substitute back 
to the unconscious material. What the dream actually 
tells us is the manifest dream content, and the concealed 
material, which we hope to reach by pursuing the ideas 
that occur to the dreamer as the latent dream thoughts. 

1916X 15/126 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
II. Dreams (1916). Lecture VIII: Children’s dreams. 

Children’s dreams are discussed. They are short, clear, 
coherent, easy to understand and unambiguous. From 
the dreams of 4- and 5-year-old children, we can draw 
conclusions on the essential nature of dreams in general. 
Dreams are not senseless; they are intelligible, com- 
pletely valid mental acts. The dreams of children are 
without any dream distortion, and therefore call for no 
interpretive activity. The manifest and the latent dream 
coincide . A child’s dream is a reaction to an experience 
of the previous day, which has left behind it a regret, a 
longing, a wish that has not been dealt with. The dream 
produces a direct, undisguised fulfillment of that wish. 
Dreams are not disturbers of sleep, but guardians of 
sleep which get rid of disturbances of sleep. What insti- 
gates a dream is a wish, and the fulfillment of that wish 
is the content of the dream. A dream does not simply 
give expression to a thought, but represents the wish 
fulfilled as a hallucinatory experience. There is another 
class of dreams which are undistorted and, like children’s 
dreams, can easily be recognized as wish fulfillments. 
These are the dreams which all through life are called up 
by imperative bodily needs, such as hunger, thirst, and 
sexual need. They are wish fulfillments as reactions to 
internal somatic stimuli. There are also dreams of impa- 
tience and dreams of convenience. 

1916X 15/136 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
II. Dreams (1916). Lecture IX: The censorship of 
dreams. 

The censorship of dreams is discussed. Dreams are 
things which get rid of psychical stimuli disturbing to 
sleep, by the method of hallucinatory satisfaction. 
Dream distortion is what makes a dream seem strange 
and unintelligible to us. Dream distortion is carried out 



by dream work. Wherever there are gaps in the manifest 
dream, the dream censorship is responsible for them. 
Another manifestation of the censorship occurs when- 
ever a dream element is remembered especially faintly, 
indefinitely, and doubtfully among other elements that 
are more clearly constructed. Censorship takes effect 
more frequently by producing softenings, approxima- 
tions, and allusions instead of the genuine thing. The 
distortion of accent is one of the chief instruments of 
dream distortion. It gives the dream the strangeness 
which the dreamer himself does not recognize as his own 
production. Omission, modification, and fresh grouping 
of the material are the activities of the dream censorship 
and the instruments of dream distortion. The dream 
censorship itself is the originator, or one of the origina- 
tors, of the dream distortion. The purposes which exer- 
cise the censorship are those which are acknowledged by 
the dreamer’s waking judgment. The wishes which are 
censored and given a distorted expression in dreams are 
first and foremost manifestations of an unbridled and 
ruthless egoism. The dreamer’s own ego appears in every 
dream and plays the chief part in it. 



1916X 15/149 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
II. Dreams (1916). Lecture X: Symbolism in dreams. 

Symbolism in dreams is discussed. Symbols realize to 
some extent the ideal of the ancient as well as of the 
popular interpretation of dreams. The essence of the 
symbolic relation is that it is a comparison, though not a 
comparison of any sort. Special limitations seem to be 
attached to the comparison. Not everything with which 
we can compare an object or a process appears in dreams 
as a symbol for it. A dream does not symbolize every 
possible element of the latent dream thought but only 
certain definite ones. The range of things which are given 
symbolic representation in dreams is not wide: the 
human body as a whole, parents, children, brothers and 
sisters, birth, death, nakedness, and sexual life. The one 
typical representation of the human figure as a whole is 
a house. One’s parents appear as the Emperor and Em- 
press, the King and Queen, etc. Children and brothers 
and sisters are symbolized as small animals or vermin. 
Birth is almost invariably represented by something 
which has a connection with water. Dying is replaced in 
dreams by departure, being dead by various obscure 
timid hints and nakedness by clothes and uniforms. Sex- 
ual life is represented by rich symbolism. The male organ 
finds symbolic substitutes in things that are long and 
upstanding. The female genitals are symbolically repre- 
sented by objects that share their characteristic of en- 
closing a hollow space which can take something into 
itself. 



p' 



101 



no 



t 



1916X 15/170 
1916X 15/170 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
11. Dreams (1916). Lecture XI: The dream-work. 

The work which transforms the latent dream into the 
manifest one is called the dream work. The work which 
proceeds in the contrary direction, is the work of inter- 
pretation. The first achievement of the dream work is 
condensation. The manifest dream has a smaller content 
than the latent one. Condensation is brought about by: 
1) the total omission of certain latent elements, 2) only 
a fragment of some complexes in the latent dream pass- 
ing over into the manifest one, and 3) latent elements 
which have something in common being combined and 
fused into a single unity in the manifest dream. The 
second achievement of the dream work is displacement. 
It manifests itself in 2 ways: in the first, a latent element 
is replaced not by a component part of itself but by 
something more remote, that is, by an allusion; and in 
the second, the psychical accent is shifted from an im- 
portant element on to another which is unimportant. 
The third achievement of the dream work consists in the 
regressive transformation of thoughts into visual images. 
Nonsense and absurdity in dreams have their meaning. 
Conformities in the latent material are replaced by con- 
densations in the manifest dream. Contraries are treated 
in the same way as conformities. Speeches in dreams are 
copies and combinations of speeches which one has 
heard or spoken oneself on the day before the dream. 
The dream work is equally unable to carry out calcula- 
tions. 

1916X 15/184 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
II. Dreams (1916). Lecture XII: Some analyses of 
sample dreams. 

Some analyses of sample dreams are presented. The 
first dream that is presented consists only of 2 short 
pictures: His uncle was smoking a cigarette although it 
was a Saturday. A woman was caressing and fondling 
him as though he were her child. This dream means that 
cuddling with his mother was something impermissible, 
like smoking on a Saturday to a pious Jew. When anyone 
has lost someone near and dear to him, he produces 
dreams of a special sort for some time afterwards, in 
which knowledge of the death arrives at the strangest 
compromises with the need to bring the dead person to 
life again. In some of these dreams the person who has 
died is dead and at the same time still alive, because he 
does not know he is dead; only if he did know would he 
die completely. In others, he is half dead and half alive, 
and each of these states is indicated in a particular way. 
The sexual life is represented by rich symbolism in the 
dreams: Pursuit and the breathless climbing upstairs 
represent the sexual act; drawers, chests, and cases, stand 



for the female genitals; a pit with a tree torn out refers 
to a piece of infantile sexual theory, to the belief that 
girls originally had the same genitals as boys and that 
their later shape was the result of castration; a triad of 
figures represent the male genitals; a landscape repre- 
sents the female ones; and trunks are symbols of 
women. 



1916X 15/199 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
11. Dreams (1916). Lecture XIII: The archaic features 
and infantilism of dreams. 

The archaic features and infantilism of dreams are 
discussed. The mode of the dream work is described as 
archaic or regressive. The death wish against someone 
they love, which is later so mysterious, originates from 
the earliest days of their relationship to that person. 
Whenever anyone in the course of one’s life gets in one’s 
way, a dream is promptly ready to kill that person, even 
if it be father or mother, brother or sister, husband or 
wife. It is an untenable error to deny that children have 
a sexual life and to suppose that sexuality only begins at 
puberty with the maturation of the genitals. From the 
very first, children have a copious sexual life, which dif- 
fers at many points from what is later regarded as 
normal. Children may be described as polymorphously 
perverse, and if these impulses only show traces of activ- 
ity, that is because they are of less intensity compared 
with those in later life and because all a child’s sexual 
manifestations are energetically suppressed by educa- 
tion. Among the forbidden wishes, special emphasis 
deserves to be laid on the incestuous ones, that is, on 
those aiming at sexual intercourse with parents and 
brothers and sisters. The material of the forgotten expe- 
riences of childhood is accessible to dreams, but the 
mental life of children, with ail its characteristics, its 
egoism, its incestuous choice of love objects, still persist 
in dreams, that is, in the unconscious and dreams carry 
us back to this infantile level. 

191 6X 15/213 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
II. Dreams (1916). Lecture XIV: Wish-fulfillment. 

Wish fulfillment is discussed. The dream work con- 
sists essentially in the transformation of thoughts into a 
hallucinatory experience. It is the intention of the dream 
work to get rid of a mental stimulus, which is disturbing 
sleep, by means of the filfillment of a wish. If dreams are 
the fulfillment of wishes, distressing feelings should be 
impossible in them. But 3 kinds of complications must 
be taken into account. First, it may be that the dream 
work has not completely succeeded in creating a wish 



111 



102 



1916X 16/257 



O 

ERIC 



fulfillment; so that a portion of the distressing effect in 
the dream thoughts has been left over in the manifest 
dream. Second, an anxiety dream is often the undis- 
guised fulfillment of a wish, not, of course, of an accept- 
able wish, but of a repudiated one. The generation of 
anxiety has taken the place of the censorship. Third, 
there is a possibility that the fulfillment of a wish may 
bring about something very far from pleasant, namely, a 
punishment. The only essential thing about dreams is the 
dream work that has influenced the thought material. 
The latent dream thoughts are unconscious to the 
dreamer and consist partly in residues of the previous 
day’s mental impulses and intellectual operations and 
parti) in powerful, repressed, wishful impulses, stem- 
ming hem an earlier period of life, which provide the 
psychical energy for the construction of the dream. 



1916X 15/228 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
II. Dreams (1916). Lecture XV: Uncertainties and criti- 
cisms. 



Uncertainties and criticisms of the theory of dreams 
are presented. The dream work makes a translation of 
the dream thoughts into a primitive mode of expression 
similar to picture writing. All such primitive systems of 
expressions are characterized by indefiniteness and am- 
biguity. The coalescence of contraries in the dream work 
is analogous to the so-called antithetical meaning of 
primal words in the most ancient languages. The points 
of uncertainty which people have tried to use as objec- 
tions to the soundness of Freud’s dream interpretations 
are regular characteristics of all primitive systems of 
expression. A second group of doubts /is closely con- 
nected with the impression that a number of the solu- 
tions to which we find ourselves driven in interpreting 
dreams seem to be forced, artificial, arbitrary, or even 
comic, and facetious. With the help of displacement, the 
dream censorship creates substitutive structures which 
are described as allusions. But they are allusions which 
are not easily recognizable as such. Another objection, 
made by psychoanalysts, is that dreams are concerned 
with attempts at adaptation to present conditions and 
with attempts at solving future problems, that they have 
a prospective purpose. This assertion is based on a con- 
fusion between the dream and the latent dream thoughts 
and is based on disregarding the dream work. It is often 
possible to influence dreamers as to what they shall 
dream about, but never as to what they shall dream. The 
mechanism of the dream work and the unconscious 
dream wish are exempt from any outside influence. 



VOL. XVI Introductory Lectures on 
Psycho-Analysis (Part III) 
(1916-1917) 

1916X 16/243 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture XVI: 
Psycho-analysis and psychiatry. 

The psychoanalytic view of the phenomena of neu- 
rosis is presented. Some patients do not close the doors 
between the waiting room and the office. This happens 
only when the waiting room is empty, not full. This 
action is not a matter of chance but has a motive, a sense 
and an intention. It has a place in an assignable mental 
context. A case history is presented of a woman suffer- 
ing from delusions of jealousy. The patient actually was 
in love with her son-in-law. This love was not conscious; 
but it remained in existence and, even though it was 
unconscious, it exercised a severe pressure. Some relief 
had to be looked for. The easiest mitigation was offered 
by the mechanism of displacement which plays a part so 
regularly in the generating of delusional jealousy. The 
phantasy of her husband’s unfaithfulness acted as a 
cooling compress on her burning wound. Psychoanalysis 
showed that the delusion ceased to be absurd or unintel- 
ligible, it had a sense, it had good motives and it fitted 
into the context of an emotional experience of the 
patient’s. The delusion was necessary, as a reaction to an 
unconscious mental process, and it was to this con- 
nection that it owed its delusional character and its 
resistance to every logical and realistic attack. The fact 
that the delusion turned out to be a jealous one and not 
one of another kind was unambiguously determined by 
the experience that lay behind the illness. 



1916X 16/257 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neurosis (1917). Lecture 
XVII: The sense of symptoms. 

The sense of neurotic symptoms was first discovered 
by Josef Breuer. Obsessional neurosis is shown in the 
patient’s being occupied with thoughts in which he is in 
fact not interested, in his being aware of impulses in 
himself wliich appear very strange to him and in his 
being led to actions, the performance of which, give him 
no enjoyment, but which it is quite impossible for him 
to omit. Two examples of the analysis of an obsessional 
symptom are presented. The first patient is a lady, 
nearly 30 years of age, who suffered from the most 
severe obsessional manifestations. She ran from her 
room into another neighboring one, took up a particular 
position there beside a table that stood in the middle, 



life. 



455-582 O • 72 - 8 



t 



1916X 16/273 

rang the bell for her housemaid, sent her on some indif- 
ferent errand or let her go without one, and then ran 
back into her own one. The obsessional action appeared 
to have been a representation, a repetition, of a signifi- 
cant scene; that of her wedding night. The second 
patient was a 19-year-old gill. She developed a sleep 
ceremonial as follows: the big clock in her room was 
stopped, all the other clocks or watches in the room 
were removed, and her tiny wrist watch was not allowed 
inside her bedside table. The patient gradually came to 
learn that it was a symbol of the female genitals that 
clocks were banished from her equipment for the night. 

1916X 16/273 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture 
XVIII: Fixation to traumas-The unconscious. 

The closest analogy to the behavior of neurotics is 
afforded by illnesses which are produced by war, trau- 
matic neuroses. The traumatic neuroses give a clear 
indication that a fixation at the moment of the trau- 
matic accident lies at their root. These patients regularly 
repeat the traumatic situation in their dreams. The 
existence of unconscious mental processes is revealed in 
the obsessional behavior of neurotics. These patients are 
not aware of the link between their obsessional behavior 
and the precipitating circumstance. The sense of the 
symptoms is regularly unconscious. There is an insep- 
arable relation between this fact of the symptoms being 
unconscious and the possibility of their existing. 
Symptoms are never constructed from conscious proc- 
esses; as soon as the unconscious processes concerned 
have become conscious, the symptom must disappear. 
The task of psychoanalysis is to make conscious every- 
thing that is pathogenically unconscious. Its task is to fill 
up all the gaps in the patient’s memory, to remove his 
amnesias. 

1916X 16/286 

Introductory lectures on psychoanalysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture 
XIX: Resistance and repression. 

When we undertake to restore a patient to health, to 
relieve him of the symptoms of his illness, he meets us 
with a violent and tenacious resistance, which persists 
throughout the whole length of the treatment. In 
psychoanalytic therapy, we instruct the patient to put 
himself into a state of quiet, unreflecting self- 
observation, and to report whatever internal perceptions 
he is able to make in the order to which they occur to 
him. One hardly comes across a single patient who does 
not make an attempt at reserving some region or other 
for himself so as to prevent the treatment from having 
access to it. Some patients put up intellectual resist- 



ances. The patient also knows how to put up resistances, 
without going outside the framework of the analysis, the 
overcoming of which is among the most difficult of tech- 
nical problems. Instead of remembering, he repeats 
attitudes and emotional impulses from his early life 
which can be used as a resistance against the doctor and 
the treatment by means of what is known as transfer- 
ence. If the patient is a man, he usually extracts this 
material from his relation to ltis father, into whose place 
he fits the doctor. The pathogenic process which is 
demonstrated by resistance is called repression. It is the 
precondition for the construction of symptoms. 
Symptoms are a substitute for something that is held 
back by repression. Neurotic symptoms are substitutes 
for sexual satisfactions. 

1916X 16/303 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture XX: 
The sexual life of human beings. 

The sexual life of human beings is discussed. By 
means of careful investigations we have come to know 
groups of individuals whose sexual life deviates from the 
usual picture of the average. Only members of their own 
sex can rouse their sexual wishes. They are called homo- 
sexuals or inverts. This class of perverts behave to their 
sexual object in approximately the same way as normal 
people do to theirs. There is a long series of abnormal 
people whose sexual activity diverges more and more 
widely from what seems desirable to a sensible person. 
They are divided into those in whom, like the homo- 
sexuals, the sexual object has been changed, &nd others 
in whom the sexual aim is what has primarily been 
altered. Neurotic symptoms are substitutes for sexual 
satisfaction. Of the many symptomatic pictures in which 
obsessional neurosis appears, the most important turn 
out to be those provoked by the pressure of excessively 
strong sadistic sexual impulses. Psychoanalytic research 
has had to concern itself with the sexual life of children. 
This is because the memories and associations arising 
during the analysis of symptoms in adults regularly led 
back to the early years of childhood. The first area of 
sexual interest in a baby is the mouth. The next eroto- 
genic zone is the anus. A sign of maturity is the passing 
of sexual interest to the genitals. 

1916X 16/320 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
HI. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture XXI: 
The development of the libido and the sexual organi- 
zations. 

The development of the libido and of the sexual 
organizations are discussed. The sexual life of children 
cannot be doubted from the third year of life onwards: 
at about that time the genitals already begin to stir; a 



104 



o 

ERIC 




1916X 16/378 



period of infantile masturbation, of genital satisfaction, 
sets in. From about the sixth to the eighth year of life 
onwards, we can observe a halt and retrogression in sex* 
ual development, which, in cases where it is most 
propitious culturally, deserves to be called a period of 
latency. The majority of experiences and mental 
impulses before the start of the latency period fall victim 
to infantile amnesia. The task for psychoanalysis is to 
bring this forgotten period back into memory. From the 
third year of life, a child’s sexual life shows much agree- 
ment with an adult’s. A kind of loose organization which 
might be called pregenital exists before that. During this 
earlier phase, what stands in the forefront are not the 
genital component instincts but the sadistic and anal 
ones. The sadistic anal organization is the immediate 
forerunner of the phase of genital primacy. The turning 
point of the sexual development is the subordination of 
all the component sexual instincts under the primacy of 
the genitals. Erotic desires become focused upon the 
parent of the opposite sex, in association with the mur- 
derous wish to do away with all rivals, in the Oedipus 
complex. 



1916X 16/339 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neurosis (1917). Lecture 
XXII: Some thoughts on development and regression— 
Aetiology. 

The libidinal function goes through a lengthy devel- 
opment before it can be enlisted in the service of repro- 
duction. A development of this kind involves 2 dangers: 
inhibition and regression. There are 2 kinds of regres- 
sions: a return to the objects first cathected by the 
libido which are of an incestuous nature; and a return of 
the sexual organization as a whole to earlier stages. 
Repression is the process by which an act which is ad- 
missible to consciousness, one which belongs to the pre- 
conscious system, is made unconscious. In hysteria, 
there is a regression to an earlier stage of the sexual 
organization. The chief part in the mechanism of hyste- 
ria is played by repression. In obsessional neurosis, it is 
the regression of the libido to the preliminary stage of 
the sadistic anal organization that is the most striking 
fact and the one which is decisive for what is manifested 
in symptoms. The meaning of psychical conflict can be 
adequately expressed by saying that for an external 
frustration to become pathogenic an internal frustration 
must be added to it. Another factor in the etiology of 
the neuroses, the tendency to conflict, is as much 
dependent on the development of the ego as on that of 
the libido. The transition from the pleasure principle to 
the reality principle is one of the most important steps 
foward in the ego’s development. 



1916X 16/358 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture 
XXIII: The paths to the formation of symptoms. 

Psychical (or psychogenic) symptoms and psychical 
illness are acts that are detrimental, or at least useless, to 
the subject’s life as a whole, often complained of by him 
as unwelcome and bringing unpleasure or suffering to 
him. The main damage they do resides in the mental 
expenditure which they themselves involve and in the 
further expenditure that becomes necessary for fighting 
against them. Neurotic symptoms are the outcome of a 
conflict which arises over a new method of satisfying the 
libido. The path to perversion branches off sharply from 
that to neurosis. The libido’s escape under conditions of 
conflict is made possible by the presence of fixations. 
The regressive cathexis of these fixations leads to the 
circumvention of the repression and to a discharge of the 
libido, subject to the conditions of a compromise being 
observed. The libido finds the fixations which it requires 
in order to break through the repressions in the activities 
and experiences of infantile sexuality, in the abandoned 
component trends, in the objects of childhood which 
have been given up. The symptoms create a substitute 
for the frustrated satisfaction by means of a regression 
of the libido to earlier times. Among the occurrences 
which recur again and again in the youthful history of 
neurotics are: observation of parental intercourse, se- 
duction by an adult, and threat of being castrated. The 
libido’s retreat to phantasy is an intermediate stage on 
the path to the formation of symptoms and it seems to 
call for a special name. Jung called it introversion. 

191 6X 16/378 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture 
XXIV : The common neurotic state. 

One of the ways in which the ego is related to its 
neurosis is most clearly recognizable in traumatic neu- 
rosis. In traumatic neuroses, and particularly in those 
brought about by the horrors of war, we are unmis- 
takably presented with a self-interested motive on the 
part of the ego, seeking for protection and advantage, a 
motive which cannot create the illness by itself but 
which assents to it and maintains it when once it has 
come about. The ego takes a similar interest in the devel- 
opment and maintenance of the neurosis in every other 
case. In average circumstances, we recognize that by 
escaping into a neurosis the ego obtains a certain internal 
gain from illness. The symptoms of the actual neuroses, 
intracranial pressure, sensations of pain, a state of irrita- 
tion in an organ, and weakening or inhibition of a func- 
tion have no sense, no psychical meaning. They are not 
only manifested predominantly in the body but they are 



105 



1916X 16/392 



also themselves entirely somatic processes, in the gener- 
ating of which all the complicated mental mechanisms 
are absent. There are 3 pure forms of actual neuroses: 
neurasthenia, anxiety neurosis, and hypochondria. 

1916X 16/392 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture 
XXV: Anxiety. 

The problem of anxiety is discussed. Realistic anxiety 
is rational and expedient. It calls for drastic revision. The 
first tiling about it is preparedness for the danger, which 
manifests itself in increased sensory attention and motor 
tension. The preparedness for anxiety seems to be the 
expedient element in anxiety, and the generation of 
anxiety the inexpedient one. In the anxiety manifested 
by neurotics, there is a general apprehensive ness, a kind 
of freely floating anxiety which is ready to attach itself 
to any idea that is in any way suitable, which influences 
judgment, selects what is to be expected, and lies in wait 
for any opportunity that will allow it to justify itself. 
This is called expectant anxiety or anxious expectation. 
A second form of anxiety is bound psychically and 
attached to particular objects or situations. This is the 
anxiety of phobias. In the third of the forms of neurotic 
anxiety, the connection between anxiety and a threaten- 
ing danger is completely lost to view. Anxiety may 
appear in hysteria as an accompaniment to hysterical 
symptoms, or in some chance condition of excitement; 
or it may make its appearance, divorced from any deter- 
minants and equally incomprehensible to us and to the 
patient, as an unrelated attack of anxiety. There is a 
connection between sexual restraint and anxiety states. 
The deflection of the libido from its normal employ- 
ment, which causes the development of anxiety, takes 
place in the region of somatic processes. 

1916X 16/412 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture 
XXVI: The libido theory and narcissism. 

The libido theory and narcissism are discussed. Sex- 
uality is the single function of the living organism which 
extends beyond the individual and is concerned with his 
relation to the species. The cathexesof energy which the 
ego directs towards the objects of its sexual desires are 
termed libido; all the others, which are sent out by the 
self-preservative instincts, are called interest. In 1908, 
Karl Abraham pronounced the main characteristic of 
schizophrenia to be that in it the libidina) cathexis of 
objects was lacking. In a sleeper, the primal state of 
distribution of the libido is restored, total narcissism, in 
which libido and ego interest, still united and indistin- 
guishable, dwell in the self-sufficing ego. Narcissism is 



the libidinal complement to egoism. When we speak of 
egoism, we have in view only the individual’s advantage; 
when we talk of narcissism we are also taking his li- 
bidinal satisfaction into account. Object choice, the step 
forward in the development of the libido which is made 
after the narcissistic stage, can take place according to 2 
different types: either according to the narcissistic iype, 
where the subject’s own ego is replaced by another one 
that is as similar as possible, or according to the attach- 
ment type, where people who have become precious 
through satisfying the other vital needs are chosen as 
objects by the libido as well. 

1916X 16/431 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). Part 
111. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture 
XXVII: Transference. 

Transference is discussed. By carrying what is uncon- 
scious on into the conscious, we lift the repression, we 
remove the preconditions for the formation of symp- 
toms. The repression must be gotten rid of, after which 
the substitution of the conscious material for the 
unconscious can proceed smoothly. The resistance is 
removed by discovering it and showing it to the patient. 
The anticathexis or the resistance does not form part of 
the unconscious but of the ego. The patient, who ought 
to want nothing else but to find a way out of his dis- 
tressing conflicts, develops a special interest in the 
person of the doctor. For a time, relations with him 
become very agreeable. But then, difficulties arise in the 
treatment. The patient behaves as though he were out- 
side the treatment and as though he had not made an 
agreement with the doctor. The cause of the disturbance 
is that the patient has transferred on to the doctor 
intense feelings of affection which are justified neither 
by the doctor's behavior nor by the situation that has 
developed during the treatment. Transference can 
appear as a passionate demand for love or in more 
moderate forms; the libidinal desire can be toned down 
into a proposal for an inseparable, but ideally nonsen- 
sual, friendship. With his male patients, the doctor 
comes across a form of expression of the transference 
which is hostile or negative. The transference is neces- 
sary in order for a cure. 

1916X 16/448 

Introductory lectures on psychoanalysis (1916-17). Part 
III. General theory of the neuroses (1917). Lecture 
XXVIII: Analytic therapy. 

Analytic theory is discussed. Direct suggestion is sug- 
gestion aimed against the manifestation of the symp- 
toms; it is a struggle between your authority and the 
motives for the illness. Experience shows that in re- 
nouncing direct suggestion we are not giving up anything 



106 



1918B 17/7 



of irreplaceable value. Hypnotic treatment seeks to 
expose and get rid of something. An analytic treatment 
demands from both doctor and patient the accomplish- 
ment of serious work, which is employed in lifting 
internal resistances. Through the overcoming of these 
resistances the patient’s mental life is permanently 
changed, is raised to a high level of development, and 
remains protected against fresh possibilities of falling ill. 
A neurotic is incapable of enjoyment and of efficiency, 
the former because his libido is not directed toward any 
real object and the latter because he is obliged to employ 
a great deal of his available energy on keeping his libido 
under repression and on warding off its assaults. He 
would become healthy if the conflict between his ego 
and his libido came to an end and if his ego had his 
libido again at its disposal. The therapeutic task consists, 
in freeing the libido from its present attachments, which 
are withdrawn from the ego, and in making it once more 
serviceable to the ego. The therapeutic work falls into 2 
phases: 1) all the libido is forced from the symptoms 
into the transference and concentrated there; and 2) the 
struggle is waged around this new object and the libido is 
liberated from it. 

1916X 16/478 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). 
Index of parapraxes. 

An index of parapraxes is presented. The source of 
each parapraxis is given where it is other than Freud 
himself. The 6 parapraxes include: bungled and symp- 
tomatic actions, errors; forgetting intentions, lost ob- 
jects; forgetting names; misreadings; slips of the pen and 
misprints; and slips of the tongue. In addition to Freud, 
the sources include: Brill, Maeder, Bernard Shaw, Jones, 
Dattner, Jung, Lichtenberg, Crown Prince, Stekel, 
Reitler, Meringer and Mayer, Rank, Constable, Lattman, 
Schiller and Graf. 

19I6X 16/480 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). 
Index of dreams. 

An index of dreams is presented. The subject matter 
of the dreams includes a trip across Lake Aussee, a 
black-edged visiting card, 2 rows of boys, a brother in a 
box, a brown dachshund, a shop in Cairo, the English 
Channel, a basket of cherries, church and landscape, 
church bells, a clock man, broken crockery, a customs 
officer, a dead daughter, an exhumed father, an exten- 
sive view, God in a paper cocked hat, a kiss in an auto- 
mobile, love services, a low hanging chandelier, a 
murderer in a railway train, a mustard plaster, an officer 
in a red cap, Orvieto wine, a piano that needs tuning, 
pulling a woman from behind a bed, the shape of a table, 
sleigh bells, strawberries, 3 theater tickets, 2 black 
trunks, 2 sisters, and an uncle smoking a cigarette. 



1916X 16/481 

Introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1916-17). 
Index of symbols. 

An index of 139 symbols is presented. They include: 
apples, balloons, beheading, blossoms, books, bottles, 
boxes, breaking, bushes, cases, castle, cavities, chapels, 
chests, churches, citadel, city, climbing, cloaks, clothes, 
crafts, cupboards, daggers, dancing, departure, doors, 
emperor and empress, falling, fishes, flame, flowers, 
flying, foot, fortress, fountains, gardens, gates, gliding, 
hammers, hand, hats, head, hearth, hills, hollows, horse- 
shoe, house, instruments, jewels, keys, knives, ladders, 
landscape, limbs, linen, materials, mouth, mushroom, 
mussels, neckties, ovens, overcoats, paper, peaches, pen- 
cils, piano playing, pig, pillow, pistols, pits, playing, 
plough, pockets, posts, receptacles, reptiles, revolvers, 
riding, rifles, rocks, rooms, sabres, ships, shoes, sliding, 
staircases, steps, sticks, sweets, tables, three, tools, train 
journey, treasure, trees, trunks, umbrellas, under- 
clothing, uniforms, vermin, water, windows, wood, and 
zeppelins. 



VOL. XVII An Infantile Neurosis and 
Other Works (1917-1919) 

1918B 17/3 

From the history of an infantile neurosis (1918). 
Editor’s note. (1955). 

From the History of an Infantile Neurosis is the most 
elaborate and the most important of all Freud’s case 
histories. It was in February, 1910, that the wealthy 
young Russian who is its subject came to Freud for 
analysis. His first course of treatment, which is the one 
reported , lasted from then until July, 1 914. The primary 
significance of the case history at the time of its publica- 
tion was clearly the support it provided for his criticisms 
of Adler and more especially of Jung. Here was con- 
clusive evidence to refute any denial of infantile 
sexuality. The analysis sheds light on the earlier, oral, 
organization of the libido. Perhaps the chief clinical 
finding was the evidence revealed of the determining 
part played in the patient’s neurosis by his primary 
feminine impulses. The marked degree of bisexuality of 
the patient is discussed. 

1918B 17/7 

From the history of an infantile neurosis (1918). Part I. 
Introductory remarks about the “Wolfman.” 

The case which Freud reports is characterized by a 
number of peculiarities which require emphasis. It is 
concerned with a young man whose health had broken 
down in his eighteenth year after a gonorrhoeal 



r' 



107 






116 



1918B 17/13 



infection, and who was entirely incapacitated and com- 
pletely dependent upon other people when he began his 
psychoanalytic treatment several years later. His early 
years were dominated by a severe neurotic disturbance, 
which began immediately before his fourth birthday as 
an anxiety hysteria (in the shape of an animal phobia), 
then changed into an obsessional neurosis with a 
religious content, and lasted as far as into his tenth year. 
Freud’s description and analysis of the case are restricted 
to the aspect of infantile neurosis, IS years after its 
termination. The first years of the treatment produced 
scarcely any change. The patient remained for a long 
time unassailably entrenched behind an attitude of 
obliging apathy. His shrinking from a self-sufficient 
existence was a great problem. Freud waited until the 
patient became strongly enough attached to him to 
counterbalance this shrinking. Freud told the patient 
that the treatment had to come to an end at a fixed 
date; and under the pressure of this limit his resistance 
and his fixation to the illness gave way. It is concluded 
that the length of analysis and the quantity of material 
which must be mastered are of no importance in com- 
parison with the resistance which is met within the 
course of the work, and are only of importance insofar 
as they are necessarily proportional to the resistance. 

1918B 17/13 

From the history of an infantile neurosis (1918). Part II. 
General survey of the patient’s environment and of the 
history of the case. 

A general survey is made of the patient’s environment 
and of the history of the case. His mother suffered from 
abdominal disorders, and his father from attacks of 
depression, which led to his absence from home. As a 
consequence of her weak health, the patient’s mother 
had little to do with her children. As far back as he 
could remember he was looked after by a nurse, an 
uneducated old woman of peasant birth, with an 
untiring affection for him. He seems at first to have been 
a very good natured, tractable, and even quiet child, so 
that they used to say of him that he ought to have been 
the girl and his elder sister the boy. But once, when his 
parents came back from their summer holiday, they 
found him transformed. He had become discontented, 
irritable and violent, took offense on every possible 
occasion, and then flew into a rage and screamed like a 
savage. This happened during the summer while the 
English governess was with them. The patient’s sister 
tormented him by always displaying a picture of a wolf 
which frightened him. During the years of his childhood 
he went through an easily recognizable attack of obses- 
sional neurosis. He related that during a long period he 
was very pious. The patient’s more mature years were 
marked by a very unsatisfactory relation to his father, 
who, after repeated attacks of depression, was no longer 



able to conceal the pathological features of his character. 
All of the phenomena which the patient associated with 
the phase of his life that began with his naughtiness 
disappeared in about his eighth year. 

1918B 17/19 

From the history of an infantile neurosis (1918). Part 

III. The seduction and its immediate consequences. 

A case history of seduction and its immediate con- 
sequences are discussed. When Freud’s patient was very 
small, his sister seduced him into sexual practices. His 
sister took hold of his penis and played with it. The 
phantasies that the patient had were meant to efface the 
memory of an event which later on seemed offensive to 
his masculine self-esteem. According to these phantasies 
it was not he who had played the passive part towards 
his sister, but he had been aggressive, had tried to see his 
sister undressed, had been rejected and punished, and 
had for that reason got into the rage which the family 
tradition talked of. The boy’s age at the time at which 
his sister began her seductions was 3ki years. He held aloof 
from her and her solicitations soon ceased. The patient 
envied her the respect which his father showed for her 
mental capacity and intellectual achievements, while he, 
intellectually inhibited since his neurosis, had to be 
content with a lower estimation. But he tried to win, 
instead of her, his nurse, Nanya. He began to play with 
his penis in Nanya’s presence but Nanya disillusioned 
him and threatened castration. His sexual life which was 
beginning to come under the sway of the genital zone, 
gave way before an external obstacle, and was thrown 
back by its influence into an earlier phase of pregenital 
organization. At the suppression of his masturbation, the 
boy’s sexual life took on a sadistic anal character. There 
was an intense and constant ambivalence in the patient, 
shown in the development of both members of the pairs 
of contrary component instincts. After the refusal by his 
Nanya, his libidinal expectation detached itself from her 
and began to contemplate his father as a sexual object. 
By bringing his naughtiness forward he was trying to 
force punishments and beatings out of his father, and in 
that way to obtain from him the masochistic sexual 
satisfaction that he desired. The signs of alteration in the 
patient’s character were not accompanied by any 
symptoms of anxiety until after the occurrence of a 
particular event (wolf dream). 

1918B 17/29 

From the history of an infantile neurosis (1918). Part 

IV. The dream and the primal scene. 

The dream of Freud’s patient in relation to the primal 
scene is discussed. The patient dreamed that the bed- 
room window opened and he saw 6 or 7 white wolves in 
the walnut tree outside the window. In great terror, 



108 

117 



1918B 17/72 



evidently of being eaten up, he screamed and woke up. 
Interpretation of this dream was a task which lasted 
several years. The only piece of action in the dream was 
the opening of the window. The wolves sat quite still 
and without making any movement on the branches of 
the tree. He had always connected this dream with the 
recollection that during these years of his childhood he 
was most tremendously afraid of the picture of a wolf in 
a book of fairy tales. What sprang into activity that night 
out of the chaos of the dreamer’s unconscious memory 
traces was the picture of copulation between his parents, 
copulation in circumstances which were not entirely 
usual and were especially favorable for observation. The 
child’s age at the date of the observation was established 
as being about VA years. The postures which he saw his 
parents adopt had the man upright, and the woman bent 
down like an animal. He thought that the posture of the 
wolf in the fairy tale The Wolf and the Seven Little 
Goats, might have reminded him of that of his father 
during the constructed primal scene. At all events, the 
picture became the point of departure for further mani- 
festations of anxiety. His anxiety was a repudiation of 
the wish for sexual satisfaction from his father, the trend 
which had put the dream into his head. The form taken 
by the anxiety, the fear of him being eaten by the wolf, 
was only the transposition of the wish to be copulated 
with by his father, that is, to be given sexual satisfaction 
in the same way as his mother. His last sexual aim, the 
passive attitude towards his father, succumbed to 
repression, and a fear of his father appeared in its place 
in the shape of the wolf phobia. His mother took the 
part of the castrated wolf, which let the others climb 
upon it; his father took the part of the wolf that 
climbed. He had identified with his castrated mother (no 
penis) during the dream and was fighting against the 
fact. His masculinity protested against being castrated 
(like Mother) in order to be sexually satisfied by Father. 
It was not only a single sexual current that started from 
the primal scene but a whole set of them. 

191 8B 17/48 

From the history of an infantile neurosis (1918). Part V. 
A few discussions. 

Scenes from early infancy, such as those brought up 
by an exhaustive analysis of neuroses, are not repro- 
ductions of real occurrences. They are products of the 
imagination, which are intended to serve as some kind of 
symbolic representation of real wishes and interests, and 
which owe their origin to a regressive tendency, to a 
turning away from the tasks of the present. The 
influence of childhood makes itself felt at the beginning 
of the formation of a neurosis, since it plays a decisive 
part in determining whether and at what point the 
individual shall fail to master the real problems of life. 
The occurrence of a neurotic disorder in the fourth and 



fifth years of childhood proves, that infantile experi- 
ences are in a position to produce a neurosis. In the case 
of Freud’s patient, the content of the primal scene is a 
picture of sexual intercourse between the boy’s parents 
in a posture especially favorable for certain observations. 
Shortly before his dream, the boy was taken to visit 
flocks of sheep, and there he saw large white dogs and 
probably also observed them copulating. What probably 
supervened during the expectant excitement of the night 
of his dream was the transference on to his parents of his 
recently acquired memory picture, with all its details, 
and it was only thus that the powerful emotional effects 
which followed were made possible. The transference 
from the copulating dogs on to his parents was accom- 
plished not by means of his making an infeience 
accompanied by words but by his searching out in his 
memory a real scene in which his parents had been 
together and which could be coalesced with the situation 
of the copulation. 

1918B 17/61 

From the history of an infantile neurosis (1918). Part 

VI. The obsessional neurosis. 

Obsessional child neurosis is discussed. When the 
patient was 4'A years old, and as his state or irritability 
and apprehensiveness had not improved, his mother 
determined to make him acquainted with the Bible stoiy 
in the hope of distracting and elevating him. His 
initiation into religion brought the previous phase to an 
end, but at the same time it led to the anxiety symptoms 
being replaced by obsessional symptoms. Up to then he 
had not been able to get to sleep easily because he had 
been afraid of having bad dreams; now he was obliged 
before he went to bed to kiss all the holy pictures in the 
room, to recite prayers, and to make innumerable signs 
of the cross upon himself and upon his bed. His child- 
hood falls into the following epochs: 1) the earliest 
period up to the seduction when he was 3 Ya years old, 
during which the primal scene took place; 2) the period 
of the alteration in his character up to the anxiety dream 
(4 years old); 3) the period of the animal phobia up to 
his initiation into religion (4'A years old); and 4) the 
period of the obsessional neurosis up to a time later than 
his tenth year. After the rebuff from his Nanya and the 
consequent suppression of the beginnings of genital 
activity, his sexual life developed in the direction of 
sadism and masochism. His knowledge of the sacred 
story gave him a chance of sublimating his predominant 
masochistic attitude towards his father. 

1918B 17/72 

From the history of an infantile neurosis (1918). Part 

VII. Anal erotism and the castration complex 

Anal erotism in relation to the castration complex is 
discussed. The obsessional neurosis grew up on the basis 



109 

118 




1918B 17/89 



of a sadistic anal constitution. For a long time before the 
analysis, feces had the significance of money for the 
patient. During his later illness he suffered from dis- 
turbances of his intestinal function. He found a great 
deal of enjoyment in anal jokes and exhibitions, and this 
enjoyment had been retained by him until after the 
beginning of his later illness. Under the influence of the 
primal scene he came to the conclusion that his mother 
had been made ill by what his father had done to her 
(intercourse); and his dread of having blood in his stool, 
of being as ill as his mother, was his repudiation of being 
identified with her in this sexual scene. But the dread 
was also a proof that in his later elaboration of the 
primal scene he had put himself in his mother’s place 
and had envied her this relation with his father. The 
organ by which his identification with women, his 
passive homosexual attitude to men, was able to express 
itself was the anal one. The disorders in the function of 
this zone had acquired the significance of feminine 
impulses of tenderness, and they retained it during the 
later illness as well. He rejected castration, and held to 
his theory of intercourse by the anus. His identification 
of his father with the castrator became important as 
being the source of an intense unconscious hostility 
towards him and of a sense of guilt which reacted against 
it. 

1918B 17/89 

From the history of an infantile neurosis (1918). Part 
VIII. Fresh material from the primal period— Solution. 

It happens in many analyses that as one approaches 
their end new recollections emerge which have hitherto 
been kept carefully concealed. Early in the analysis, the 
patient told Freud of a memory of the period in which 
his naughtiness had been in the habit of suddenly 
turning into anxiety. He was chasing a beautiful big 
butterfly but suddenly, when the butterfly had settled 
on a flower, he was seized with a dreadful fear of the 
creature, and ran away screaming. In this anxiety scene, 
a recollection of some female person had been aroused. 
Behind the screen memory of the hunted butterfly, the 
memory of the nursery maid lay concealed. When the 
patient saw this girl scrubbing the floor, he had 
micturated in the room, and she had rejoined with a 
threat of castration. When he saw the girl on the floor 
engaged in scrubbing it, and kneeling down, with her 
buttocks projecting and her back horizontal, he was 
faced once again with the posture which his mother had 
assumed in the copulation scene. She became his mother 
to him; he was seized with sexual excitement; and, like 
his father, he behaved in a masculine way towards her. 
The disturbance of appetite, the wolf phobia, and the 
obsessional piety constituted the complete series of 
infantile disorders which laid down the predisposition 
for his neurotic breakdown after he had passed the age 



of puberty. Every neurosis in an adult is built upon a 
neurosis which has occurred in his childhood. The phase 
used by the patient to sum up the troubles of which he 
complained was that the world was hidden from him by 
a veil. The veil was tom in 1 situation only: at the 
moment when, as a result of an enema, he passed a 
motion through his anus, -at which time he felt well 
again, and briefly saw the world clearly. He remembered 
that he had been born with a caul, thus the caul was the 
“veil” (birth veil) which hid him from the world. The 
phantasy of re-birth is discussed in relation to the birth 
veil. 

1918B 17/104 

From the history of an infantile neurosis (1918). Part 
IX. Recapitulations and problems. 

The advantage of having a wealth of information 
about the patient’s childhood was purchased at the 
expense of disjointed analysis. The first sign of the 
patient’s sexual development is in the disturbance of his 
appetite. This earliest recognizable sexual organization is 
called the cannibalistic or oral phase, during which the 
original attachment of sexual excitation to iJie nutri- 
tional instinct still dominates the scene. The sadistic anal 
organization is regarded as a continuation and develop- 
ment of the oral one. The boy’s anal erotism was not 
particularly noticeable. His seduction continued *o make 
its influence felt, by maintaining the passivity of his 
sexual aim and it transformed his sadism into the 
masochism which was its passive counterpart. The 
sadistic anal organization continued to exist during the 
phase of the animal phobia which set in, only it suffered 
an admixture of anxiety phenomena. The phobia came 
into existence on the level of the genital organization, 
and showed the relatively simple mechanism of an 
anxiety hysteria. The ego, by developing anxiety, was 
protecting itself against homosexual satisfaction but the 
process of repression left behind a trace. What became 
conscious was fear not of the father but of the wolf and 
the anxiety that was concerned in the formation of these 
phobias was a fear of castration. Religion achieved all 
the aims for the sake of which it is included in the 
education of the individual: It put a restraint on his 
sexual education, and lowered die importance of his 
family relationships. 

1917C 17/125 

On transformations of instinct as exemplified in anal 
erotism (1917). 

Observations made during psychoanalysis led Freud 
to suspect that the constant coexistence in any one of 
the 3 character traits of orderliness, parsimony, and 
obstinancy indicated an intensification of the anal erotic 
components in a subject’s sexual constitution, and that 



110 

119 




19I9A 17/157 



these modes of reaction, which were favored by his ego, 
had been established during the course of his develop- 
ment through the assimilation of his anal erotism. In the 
development of the libido in man, the phase of genital 
primacy must be preceded by a pregential organization 
in which sadism and anal erotism play the leading parts. 
It appears that, in products of the unconscious such as 
spontaneous ideas, phantasies, and symptoms, the con- 
cepts of feces (money, gift), baby, and penis are ill 
distinguished from one another and are easily inter- 
changeable. If we penetrate deeply enough into the 
neurosis of a woman, we meet the repressed wish to 
possess a penis like a man. The female’s wish for a penis 
and the wish for a baby are fundamentally identical. The 
ultimate outcome of the infantile wish for a penis, in 
women in whom the determinants of a neurosis in later 
life are absent, is that it changes into the wish for a man, 
and thus puts up with the man as an appendage to the 
penis. This transformation, therefore, turns an impulse 
which is hostile to the female sexual function into one 
which is favorable to it. Anal erotism finds a narcissistic 
application in the production of defiance, which con- 
stitutes an important reaction on the part of the ego 
against demands made by other people. A baby is 
regarded as feces (“lumP’), as something which becomes 
detached from the body by passing through the bowel. 
Interest in feces is carried over first to interest in gifts, 
and then to interest in money. 

191 7A 17/135 

A difficulty in the path of psycho-analysis (1917). 

A difficulty in the path of psychoanalysis is dis- 
cussed. The difficulty consists of the reaction of man to 
the psychological blow to his narcissism, due to an 
awareness of the limitations of the ego. When we try to 
understand neurotic disorders, by far the greater 
significance attaches to the sexual instincts. Neuroses 
are, in fact, the specific disorders of the sexual function. 
In general, whether or not a person develops a neurosis 
depends on the quantity of his libido, and on the possi- 
bility of satisfying it and of discharging it through satis- 
faction. The form taken by the disease is determined by 
the way in which the individual passes through the 
course of development of his sexual function, or as it is 
put, by the fixations his libido has undergone in the 
course of its development. Therapeutic efforts have their 
greatest success with a certain class of neuroses which 
proceed from a conflict between the ego instincts and 
the sexual instincts. The psychoanalytic method of treat- 
ment is able to subject the process of repression to 
revision and to bring about a solution of the conflict, 
one that is compatible with health. During the work of 
treatment, we have to consider the distribution of the 
patient’s libido; we look for the object presentations to 
which the libido is bound and free it from them, so as to 



place it at the disposal of the ego. The condition in 
which the ego retains the libido is called narcissism. The 
individual advances from narcissism to object love. 
Psychoanalysis has sought to educate the ego, which is 
not master in its own house. 

1917B 17/145 

A childhood recollection from ‘Dichtung und Wahrheit’ 
(1917). 

A childhood recollection from Goethe’s Dichtung 
und Wahrheit is discussed in relation to cases of psycho- 
analysis. If we try to recollect what happened to us in 
the earliest years of childhood, we often find that we 
confuse what we have heard from others with what is 
really a possession of our own derived from what we 
ourselves have witnessed. In every psychoanalytic 
investigation of a life history, it is usually possible to 
explain the meaning of the earliest childhood memories 
along the line of screen memories. Screen memories are 
unimportant or indifferent memories of childhood that 
owe their preservation not to their own content but to 
an associative relation between their content and 
another which is repressed. Goethe wrote about having 
thrown all his dishes, pots, and pans out of the window. 
The opinion might be formed that the throwing of 
crockery out of the window is a symbolic action, or, a 
magic action by which a child gives violent expression to 
his wish to get rid of a disturbing intruder. The bitter- 
ness children feel about the expected c. actual appear- 
ance of a rival finds expression in throwing objects out 
of the window and in other acts of naughtiness or 
destructiveness. 

191 9A 17/157 

Lines of advance in psycho-analytic therapy (1919). 

The task of physicians is to bring to the patient’s 
knowledge the unconscious, repressed impulses existing 
in him, and, for that purpose, to uncover the resistances 
that oppose this extension of his knowledge about him- 
self. The work by which we bring the repressed mental 
material into the patient’s consciousness is called 
psychoanalysis. The neurotic patient presents us with a 
torn mind, divided by resistances. As we analyze it and 
remove the resistances, it grows together, the great unity 
which we call his ego fits into itself all the instinctual 
impulses which before had been split off and held apart 
from it. The psychosynthesis is thus achieved during 
analytic treatment without intervention, automatically 
and inevitably. Analytic treatment should be carried 
through, as far as is possible, under privation, in a state 
of abstinence. It is frustration that made the patient ill, 
and his symptoms serve him as substitutive satisfactions. 
Activity on the part of the physician must take the form 



111 

120 




1919J 17/169 



of energetic opposition to premature substitutive satis- 
factions. The patient looks for his substitutive satis- 
faction in the treatment itself, in his transference rela- 
tionship with the physician; and he may even strive to 
compensate himself by this means for all the other 
privations laid upon him. It is necessary to deny the 
patient precisely those satisfactions which he desires 
most intensely and expresses most importunately. If 
everything is made pleasant for the patient he is not 
given the necessary strength for facing life. 

1919J 17/169 

On the teaching of psycho-analysis in universities 
(1919). 

The teaching of psychoanalysis in the Universities is 
discussed. The inclusion of psychoanalysis in the 
University curriculum would be regarded with satis- 
faction by every psychoanalyst. At the same time, it is 
clear that the psychoanalyst can dispense entirely with 
the University without any loss to himself. So far as the 
Universities are concerned, the question depends on 
their deciding whether they are willing to attribute any 
value at all to psychoanalysis in the training of 
physicians and scientists. The training has been criticized 
during the last few decades for the one-sided way in 
which it directs the student into the field of anatomy, 
physics and chemistry, while failing, to make plain to 
him the signiflcar.ce of mental factors in the different 
vital functions as veil as in illnesses and their treatment. 
This obvious deficiency led to the inclusion in the 
University curriculum of courses of lectures on medical 
psychology. Psychoanalysis, more than any other 
system, is fitted for teaching psychology to the medical 
student. The teaching of psychoanalysis would have to 
proceed in 2 stages: an elementary course, designed for 
all medical students, and a course of specialized lectures 
for psychiatrists. In the investigation of mental processes 
and intellectual functions, psychoanalysis pursues a 
specific method of its own. The application of this 
method extends to the solution of problems in art, 
philosophy and religion. A University stands only to gain 
by the inclusion in its curriculum of the teaching of 
psychoanalysis. 

1919E 17/175 

‘A chad is being beaten’: A contribution to the study of 
the origin of sexual perversions (1919): Editor’s note. 
(1955). 

The greater part of the paper called A Oiild is Being 
Beaten, a Contribution to the Study of the Origin of 
Sexual Perversions, consists of a very detailed clinical 
enquiry into a particular kind of perversion. Freud’s 
findings throw a special light on the problem of maso- 
chism; and, as the subtitle implies, the paper was also 



designed to extend our knowledge of the perversions in 
general. The mechanism of repression is exhaustively dis- 
cussed in 2 of Freud’s metapsychological papers; but the 
question of the motives leading to repression is nowhere 
examined more fully than in the present paper. The 
problem was one which had interested and also puzzled 
Freud from very early days. 

1919E 17/179 

’A child is being beaten’: A contribution to the study of 
the origin of sexual perversions (1919). Parts I, II, & III. 

People who seek analytic treatment for hysteria or an 
obsessional neurosis often confess to having indulged in 
the phantasy: A child is being beaten. The phantasy has 
feelings of pleasure attached to it, and on their account 
the patient has reproduced it on innumerable occasions 
in the past or may even still be doing so. At the climax 
of the imaginary situation there is almost invariably a 
masturbatory satisfaction. At first this takes place volun- 
tarily, but later on it does so in spite of the patient’s 
efforts, and with the characteristics of an obsession. The 
first phantasies of the kind are entertained very early in 
life: before school age, and not later than in the fifth or 
sixth year. This phantasy is cathected with a high degree 
of pleasure and has its issue in an act of pleasurable 
autoerotic satisfaction. A phantasy of this kind, arising 
in early childhood and retained for the purpose of auto- 
erotic satisfaction, can be regarded as a primary trait of 
perversion. One of the components of the sexual 
function has developed in advance of the rest, has made 
itself prematurely independent, has undergone fixation 
and in consequence been withdrawn from the later 
processes of development, and has in this way given 
evidence of a peculiar and abnormal constitution in the 
individual. If the sexual component which has broken 
loose prematurely is the sadistic one, then we may 
expect that its subsequent repression will result in a dis- 
position to an obsessional neurosis. Between the ages of 
2 and 4 or 5, the congenital libidinal factors are first 
awakened. The beating phantasies appear toward the end 
of this period or after its termination. Analysis shows 
that these beating phantasies have a hysterical develop- 
ment that involves many transformations (as regards the 
phantasies’ relation to the author of the phantasy and as 
regards their object, content and significance). In the 
first phase of beating phantasies among girls the child 
beaten is never the one producing the phantasy but is 
most often a brother or sister. It is always an adult that 
is beating the child in all these phantasies. The first 
phase is completely represented in the phrase ‘My father 
is beating the child.’ The second (and most important) 
phase can be stated as ‘I am being beaten by my father.’ 
The third involves a phantasy with strong and unam- 
biguous sexual excitement attached to it, thus providing 
a means for masturbatory satisfaction. 



112 

0.21 





1919D 17/205 






1919E 17/186 

‘A child is being beaten’: A contribution to the study of 
the origin of sexual perversions (1919). Parts IV & V. 

If analysis is carried through the early period to 
which the beating phantasies are referred and from 
which they are recollected, it shows us that the child is 
involved in the agitations of its parental complex. The 
affections of the girl are fixed on her father. The first 
phase (sadism) of the beating phantasy in which another 
disliked sibling is beaten by the father gratifies the 
child’s jealousy and is dependent upon the erotic side of 
the child’s life, but is also powerfully reinforced by the 
child’s egoistic interest. The phantasy of the second 
pl^se, being beaten by the father is a direct expression 
of the girl’s sense of guilt: the phantasy therefore has 
become masochistic. A sense of guilt is invariably the 
main factor that transforms sadism into masochism; 
another factor is the love impulse. This phantasy is not 
only the punishment for the forbidden genital relation, 
but also the regressive substitute for that relation, and 
from this latter source, it derives the libidinal excitation 
which is attached to it, and which finds its source, it 
derives the libidinal excitation which is attached to it, 
and which finds its outlet in masturbatory acts. The 
third phase of the beating phantasy is again sadistic. A 
perversion in childhood may become the basis for the 
construction of a perversion having a similar sense and 
persisting throughout life, one which consumes the 
subject’s whole sexual life. Masochism is not the mani- 
festation of a primary instinct, but originates from 
sadism which has been turned round upon the self, by 
means of regression from an object to the ego. People 
who harbor phantasies of this kind develop a special 
sensitiveness and irritability towards anyone whom they 
can include in the class of fathers. They are easily 
offended by a person of this kind, and in that way bring 
about the realization of the imagined situation of being 
beaten by their father. 

191 9E 17/195 

‘A child is being beaten’: A contribution to the study of 
the origin of sexual perversions (1919). Part VI. 

The little girl’s beating phantasy passes through 3 
phases, of which the first and third are consciously 
remembered. The 2 conscious phases appear to be 
sadistic; the middle and unconscious one is masochistic 
in nature; it consists in the child’s being beaten by her 
father, and it carries with it libidinal charge and a sense 
of guiit. In the first and third phantasies, the child who 
is being beaten is someone other than the subject; in the 
middle phase it is the child herself; in the third phase it 
is usually boys who are being beaten. The person who 
does the beating is the father, replaced later on by a 
substitute taken from the class of fathers. The uncon- 



scious phantasy of the middle phase has a genital 
significance and develops by means of repression and 
regression out of an incestuous wish to be loved by the 
father. There are only a few male cases with an infantile 
beating phantasy that do not have some other gross 
injury to their sexual activities. They include persons 
who can be described as masochists, in the sense of being 
sexual perverts. These men invariably transfer themselves 
into the part of a woman, while their masochistic 
attitude coincides with a feminine one. In the male 
phantasy, being beaten stands for being loved (in a 
genital sense). The boy’s beating phantasy is passive and 
is derived from a feminine attitude towards his father. 
Adler proposes, in his theory of the masculine protest, 
that every individual makes efforts not to remain on the 
inferior feminine line of development, and struggles 
towards the masculine line, from which satisfaction 
alone can be derived. The theory of psychoanalysis holds 
firmly to the view that the motive forces of repression 
must not be sexualized. No great change is effected by 
the repression of the original unconscious phantasy. 
Infantile sexuality, which is held under repression, acts 
as the chief motive force in the formation of symptoms; 
and the essential part of its content, the Oedipus 
complex, is the nuclear complex of neuroses. 



1919D 17/205 

Introduction to ‘psycho-analysis and the war neuroses’ 
(1919). 

The war neuroses, in so far as they are distinguished 
from the ordinary neuroses of peacetime by special 
characteristics, are to be regarded as traumatic neuroses 
whose occurrence has been made possible or has been 
promoted by a conflict in the ego. The conflict is 
between the soldier’s old peaceful ego and his new war- 
like one, and it becomes acute as soon as the peace ego 
realizes what danger it runs of losing its life owing to the 
rashness of its newly formed, parasitic double. The pre- 
condition of the war neuroses would seem to be a 
national army; there would be no possibility of their 
arising in an army of professional soldiers or mer- 
cenaries. The war neuroses are only traumatic neuroses. 
The traumatic neuroses and war neuroses may proclaim 
too loudly the effects of mortal danger and may be 
silent or speak only in muffled tones of the effects of 
frustration in love. In traumatic and war neuroses the 
human ego is defending itself from a danger which 
threatens it from without or which is embodied in a 
shape assumed by the ego itself. In the transference 
neuroses of peace, the enemy from which the ego is 
defending itself is actually the libido, whose demands 
seem to it to be menacing. In both cases the ego is afraid 
of being damaged. 



113 

122 



O 



1955C 17/211 



1955C 17/211 

Introduction to ‘Psychoanalysis and the war neuroses’ 
(1919). Appendix: Memorandum on the electrical treat* 
ment of war neurotics (1955) (1920). 

A memorandum on the electrical treatment of war 
neurotics is presented. Although the war neuroses mani- 
fested themselves for the most part as motor dis- 
turbances, tremors and paralyses, and although it was 
plausible to suppose that such a gross impact as that 
produced by the concussion due to the explosion of a 
shell nearby or to being buried by a fall of earth would 
lead to gross mechanical effects, observations were 
nevertheless made which left no doubt as to the 
psychical nature of the causation of these so-called war 
neuroses. It was inferred that the immediate cause of all 
war neuroses was an unconscious inclination in the 
soldier to withdraw from the demands, dangerous or 
outrageous to his feelings, made upon him by active 
service. It seemed expedient to treat the neurotic as a 
malingerer and to disregard the psychological distinction 
between conscious and unconscious intentions. Just as 
he had fled from the war into illness, means were 
adopted which compelled him to flee back from illness 
into health. For this purpose painful electrical treatment 
was employed. This treatment, however, was not effec- 
tive. In 1918, Dr. Ernst Simmel, head of a hospital for 
war neuroses at Posen, published a pamphlet in which he 
reported the extraordinarily favorable results achieved in 
severe cases of war neurosis by the psychotherapeutic 
method introduced by Freud. With the end of the war, 
the war neurotics disappeared. 

1919H 17/219 

The ‘uncanny’ (1919). Part I. Linguistic approach to the 
uncanny. 

The uncanny is discussed. The uncanny is related to 
what is frightening, to what arouses dread and horror. As 
good as nothing is to be found upon this subject in 
comprehensive treatises on esthetics. In his study of the 
uncanny, Jentsch lays stress on the obstacle presented 
by the fact that people vary greatly in their sensitivity to 
this quality of feeling. Not everything that is new and 
unfamiliar is frightening. The German word unheimticli 
is the opposite of heimlich (homelike), heimisch 
(native); the opposite of what is familiar. Among its dif- 
ferent shades of meaning the word heimlich exhibits one 
which is identical with its opposite, unheimlich. The 
word heimlich is not unambiguous, but belongs to 2 sets 
of ideas, which without being contradictory, are yet very 
different (homelike and secretly). Thus heimlich is a 
word, the meaning of which develops in the direction of 
ambivalence, until it finally coincides with its opposite, 
unheimlich. Unheimlich is in some way or other a sub- 
species of heimlich. 



1919H 17/226 

The ‘uncanny’ (1919). Part II. Phenomenology of 
uncanny affects. 

Jentsch has taken, as a very good instance of the 
uncanny, doubts whether an apparently animate being is 
really alive; or conversely, whether a lifeless object might 
not be in fact animate. To these he adds the uncanny 
effect of epileptic fits, and of manifestations of insanity. 
These doubts of alive versus inanimate are thoroughly 
discussed in the story of The Sand-Man in E. T. A. 
Hoffmann’s Nachtstucken. The feeling of something 
uncanny is directly attached to the figure of the Sand- 
Man, that is, to the idea of being robbed of one’s eyes. 
The fear of damaging or losing one’s eyes is a terrible 
threat to children. This fear of blindness is seen as part 
of a castration complex. If psychoanalytic theory is 
correct in maintaining that every effect belonging to an 
emotional impulse, whatever its kind, is transformed, if 
it is repressed, into anxiety, then among instances of 
frightening things there must be one class in which the 
frightening element can be shown to be something 
repressed which recurs. This class of frightening things 
would then constitute the uncanny. Many people exper- 
ience the feeling in the highest degree in relation to 
death and dead bodies, to the return of the dead, and to 
spirits and ghosts. The uncanny effect of epilepsy and of 
madness has the same origin. The layman sees in them 
the working of forces hitherto unsuspected in his fellow 
men, but at the same time he is dimly aware of them in 
remote corners of his own being. An uncanny effect is 
often easily produced when the distinction between 
imagination and reality is effaced, as when something 
that we have hitherto regarded as imaginary appears 
before us in reality, or when a symbol takes over the full 
functions of the thing it symbolizes. 



1919H 17/245 

The ‘uncanny’ (1919). Part III. Relation of imagination 
to reality. 

It may be true that the uncanny, unheimlich, is some- 
thing which is secretly familiar, heimlich -heimisch, 
wliich has undergone repression and then returned from 
it and that everything that is uncanny fulfills this condi- 
tion. But the selection of material on this basis does not 
enable us to solve the problem of the uncanny. Apparent 
death and the reanimation of the dead have been repre- 
sented as most uncanny themes. As soon as something 
actually happens in our lives which seems to confirm the 
old discarded beliefs, we get a feeling of the uncanny. 
When the uncanny comes from infantile complexes, the 
question of material reality does not arise; its place is 
taken by psychical reality. What is involved is an actual 
repression of some content of thought and a return of 
this repressed content, not a cessation of belief in the 



123 

o • 

ERJC 



114 



1919B 17/271 



reality of such a content. An uncanny experience occurs 
either when infantile complexes which have been 
repressed are once more revived by some impression, or 
when primitive beliefs which have been surmounted 
seem once more to be confirmed. A great deal that is not 
uncanny in fiction would be so if it happened in real life. 
There are many more means of creating uncanny effects 
in fiction than there are in real life. The factors of 
silence, solitude, and darkness are actually elements in 
the production of the infantile anxiety from which the 
majority of human beings have never become quite free. 

1919H 17/253 

The ‘uncanny’ (1919). Appendix: Extract from Daniel 
Sander’s ‘Worterbuch der Deutschen Sprache. 

Although the German title of Freud’s paper has been 
translated as “The Uncanny,” an appended extract from 
an authoritative dictionary of the German language sug- 
gests some of the difficulties involved in choosing an 
appropriate equivalent for the original title. Discussed at 
some length are the denotations, connotations, and 
implications of the German word “heimlich” (or “die 
Heimlichkeit”) and its oppositive. The latter is said to be 
essentially equivalent to the German “unbehaglich” (cf. 
Freud’s “das Unbehagen in der Kultur”), but also sug- 
gests unreasoning discomfort or a reaction of frightened 
aversion, as from some ill defined evil or the discovery of 
some unsuspected secret which should have been kept 
hidden away, but which has nonetheless become mani- 
fest. Although “heimlich” is substantially identified with 
the concept represented by the Latin “familiarities” or 
the original implications of the English word “homely,” 
it is also, and perhaps equally, identified with the idea of 
something hidden away, or something of which only a 
severely limited group has any cognizance or any right to 
either cognizance or contact, “dnheimlich,” in turn, sug- 
gests a breach of that condition and privilege, which is 
associated inevitably with both a considerable degree of 
existential guilt and potential threat, punishment, or 
vengeance. 

191 9G 17/257 

Preface to Reik’s ‘Ritual: Psycho-analytic studies’ 
(1919). 



new acquisition and has been handed on from one to 
another of a long series of generations. The Oedipus 
complex too may have had stages of development. 
Investigation suggests that life in the human family took 
a quite different form in those remote days from that 
with wliich we are now familiar. If the prehistoric and 
ethnological material on this subject is worked over 
psychoanalytically, the result is that God the Father 
once walked upon earth in bodily form and exercised 
His sovereignty as chieftain of the primal human horde 
until his sons united to slay Him. This crime of libera- 
tion and the reactions to it had as their result the appear- 
ance of the first social ties, the basic moral restrictions 
and the oldest form of religion, totemism. This hypothe- 
sis has been taken by Theodor Reik as the baas of his 
studies on the problems of the psychology of religion. 

1919C 17/267 

A note on psycho-analytic publications and prizes 
(1919). 

In the autumn of 1918, a member of the Budapest 
Psychoanalytical Society informed Freud that a fund 
had been set aside for cultural purposes from the profits 
made by industrial undertakings during the war. The 
fund was placed at Freud’s disposal, was given his name, 
and was allotted by him to the foundation of an inter- 
national psychoanalytic publishing business (the Inter- 
national Psychoanalytischer Verlag). The 2 periodical 
publications ( Internationale Zeitschrift fur arztliche 
Psychoanalyse and Imago) survived the war. The new 
publishing house, supported by the funds of the 
Budapest endowment, assumed the task of ensuring the 
regular appearance and reliable distribution of the 2 
journals. Simultaneously with the establishment of the 
psychoanalytic publishing house it was decided to award 
annual prizes out of the interest on the Budapest endow- 
ment, to 2 outstanding peices of work, one each in the 
field of medical and of applied psychoanalysis. It was 
intended that these prizes should be awarded every year 
and that the choice should fail within the whole field of 
the psychoanalytically important literature published 
during that period, irrespective of whether or not the 
author of the work in question was a Member of the 
International Psychoanalytic Association. 



The preface to Reik’s Ritual: Psychoanalytic Studies 
is presented. Psychoanalysis sprang from the need for 
bringing help to neurotic patients, who had found no 
relief through rest cures, through the arts of hydropathy, 
or through electricity. In 1913, Otto Rank and Hanns 
Sachs, brought together the results which had been 
achieved up to that time in the application of psycho- 
analysis to the mental sciences. The overcoming of the 
Oedipus complex conicides with the most efficient way 
of mastering the archaic, animal heritage of humanity. 
What is today the heritage of the individual was once a 



1919B 17/271 
James J. Putnam (1919). 

Among the first pieces of news that reached Freud 
after the raising of the barrier separating him from the 
Anglo-Saxon countries was the report of the death of 
Putnam, President of the Pan-American psychoanalytic 
group. Putnam lived to be over 72 years old, remained 
intellectually active to the end, and died peacefully of 
heart failure in his sleep in November 1918. Putnam was 
the great support of psychoanalysis in America. J. J. 



115 



o 

ERIC 



124 



1919F 17/273 



Putnam’s personal appearance was made familiar to 
European analysts through the part he took in the 
Weimar Congress of 1 9 1 1 . 

1919F 17/273 
Victor Tausk (1919). 

Shortly before the outbreak of the first World War, 
Dr. Victor Tausk, (previously a lawyer, then a journalist) 
had obtained his second doctor’s degree and set up in 
Vienna ai a nerve specialist. He was called up for active 
service and was soon promoted to senior rank. The 
stresses of many years’ service in the field could exercise 
a severely damaging psychological effect on this 
intensely conscientious man. At the last Psycho- 
analytic^ Congress, held in Budapest in September 
1918, Dr. Tausk showed signs of unusual nervous irrita- 
bility. Soon afterwards he came to the end of his mili- 
tary service, returned to Vienna, and was faced for the 
third time, in his state of mental exhaustion, with the 
hard task of building up a new existence. On the 
morning of July 3, 1919 (at the age of 42) he put an end 
to his life. Dr. Tausk had been a member of the Vienna 
Psycho-Analytical Society since autumn of 1909. His 
writings exhibit the philosophical training which he was 
able tc combine with the exact methods of science. 
Tausk also possessed an exceptional medico- 
psychological capacity. Psychoanalysis was particularly 
indebted to Dr. Tausk, who was a brilliant speaker, for 
the courses of lectures wliich he gave over a period of 
many years to large audiences of both sexes and in 
which he introduced them to the principles and prob- 
lems of psychoanalysis. 



VOL. XVIII Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 
Group Psychology and Other Works (1920-1922) 

1920G 18/3 

Beyond the pleasure principle (1920). Editor’s note. 
(1955). 

Freud began working on a first draft of Beyond the 
Pleasure Principle in March, 1919, and he reported the 
draft as finished in the following May. The work was 
finally completed by the middle of July, 1920. In the 
series of Freud’s metapsychological writings, Beyond the 
Pleasure Principle may be regarded as introducing the 
final phase of his views. He had already drawn attention 
to the compulsion to repeat as a clinical phenomenon, 
but here he attributes to it the characteristics of an 
instinct; here too for the first time he brings forward the 
new dichotomy between Eros and the death instincts. 
The problem of destructiveness, which played an ever 
more prominent part in his theoretical works, makes its 
first explicit appearance. 



1920G 18/7 

Beyond the pleasure principle (1920). Part I. Review of 
the pleasure principle. Part II. Traumatic neurosis and 
children’s play are repetitions. 

In the theory of psychoanalysis it is assumed that 
mental events are automatically regulated by the 
pleasure principle. The course of those events is 
invariably set in motion by an unpleasurable tension. 
The final outcome coincides with a lowering of that 
tension. The mental apparatus endeavors to keep the 
quantity of excitation present in it as low as possible. 
Under the influence of the ego’s instincts of 
self-preservation, the pleasure principle is replaced by 
the reality principle. Another occasion of the release of 
unpleasure is to be found in the conflicts and dissensions 
that take place in the mental apparatus while the ego is 
passing through its development into more highly 
composite organizations. Most of the unpleasure that we 
experience is perceptual unpleasure. The study of 
dreams may be considered the most trustworthy method 
of investigating deep mental processes. Dreams occurring 
in traumatic neuroses have the characteristic of 
repeatedly bringing the patient back into the situation of 
his accident, a situation from which he wakes up in 
another fright. A game that a 1 !4-year-old child invented 
was related to the child’s great cultural achievement; the 
instinctual renunciation wliich he made in allowing his 
mother to go away without protesting. At the outset, he 
was in a passive situation; but, by repeating it, 
unpleasurable though it was, as a game, he took on an 
active part. There is no need to assume the existence of a 
special imitative instinct in order to provide a motive for 
play. It is concluded that even under the dominance of 
the pleasure principle, there are ways and means enough 
of making what is in itself unpleasurable into a subject 
to be recollected and worked over in the mind. 

1920G 18/18 

Beyond the pleasure principle (1919). Part III. 
Transference neurosis is a repetition. 

Psychoanalysis is first and foremost an art of 
interpreting. A further aim comes in view: to oblige the 
patient to confirm the analyst’s construction from his 
own memory. The chief emphasis lies upon the patient’s 
resistances: the art consists in uncovering these as 
quickly as possible, in pointing them out to the patient, 
and in inducing him to abandon his resistances. 
However, the patient cannot remember the whole of 
what is repressed in him, and what he cannot remember 
may be precisely the essential part of it. He is obliged to 
repeat the repressed material instead of remembering it 
as something belonging to the past. These reproductions 
always concern some portion of infantile sexual life. 
When things have reached this stage, it is said that the 



o 

Rif 



116 



125 



1920G 18/34 



earlier neurosis has been replaced by a transference 
neurosis. The physician must get the patient to 
reexperience some portion of his forgotten life but he 
must see to it that the patient retains some degree of 
aloofness. The resistance of the conscious and 
unconscious ego operates under the sway of the pleasure 
principle: it seeks to avoid the unpleasure which would 
be produced by the liberation of the repressed. The early 
efflorescence of infantile sexual life is doomed to 
extinction because its wishes are incompatible with 
reality and with the inadequate stage of development 
which the child has reached. Patients repeat all of the 
unwanted situations and painful emotions in the 
transference and -evive them with the greatest ingenuity. 
What psychoanalysis reveals in the transference 
phenomena of neurotics can also be observed in the lives 
of some normal people: those whose human 
relationships have the same outcome. 

1920G 18/24 

Beyond the pleasure principle (1920). Part IV. 
Speculations on the death instinct. 

Psychoanalytic speculation takes as its point of 
departure the impression that consciousness may be not 
the most universal attribute of mental processes, but 
only a particular function of them. What consciousness 
yields consists essentially of perceptions of excitations 
coming from the external world and of feelings of 
pleasure and unpleasure which arise from within the 
mental apparatus. The conscious system is characterized 
by the peculiarity that in it, excitatory processes do not 
leave behind any permanent change in its elements but 
expire in the phenomenon of becoming conscious. The 
living vesicle is provided with a shield against stimuli 
from the external world. The cortical layer next to that 
shield must be differentiated as an organ for receiving 
stimuli from without. This sensitivity cortex which later 
becomes the conscious system, also receives excitations 
from within. The unpleasure of physical pain is probably 
the result of the protective shield having been broken 
through. There is then a continuous stream of 
excitations from the part of the periphery concerned to 
the central apparatus of the mind, such as could 
normally arise only from within the apparatus. Cathectic 
energy is summoned from all side to provide 
sufficiently high cathexes of energy in the environs of 
the breach. An anticathexis on a grand scale is set up and 
the other phychical systems are impoverished so that the 
remaining psychical functions are extensively paralyzed 
or reduced. The common traumatic neurosis is regarded 
as a consequence of an extensive breach being made in 
the protective shield against stimuli. Preparedness for 
anxiety and the hypercathexis of the receptive systems 
constitute the last line of defense of the shield against 
stimuli. Dreams endeavor to master the stimulus 



retrospectively, by developing the anxiety whose 
omission was the cause of the traumatic neurosis. An 
exception to the proposition that dreams are wish 
fulfillments is dreams occurring in traumatic neuroses; 
these arise in obedience to the compulsion to repeat. 
Thus it would seem that the function of dreams, which 
consists in setting aside any motives that might interrupt 
sleep, by fulfilling the wishes of disturbing impulses, is 
not their original function. If there is a ‘beyond the 
pleasure principle,’ then there was also a time before the 
purpose of dreams was the fulfillment of wishes. 



1920G 18/34 

Beyond the pleasure principle (1920). Part V. Revision 
of the theory of instincts. 

The fact that the cortical layer which receives stimuli 
is without any protective shield against excitations from 
within must have as its result that these latter 
transmissions of stimulus have a preponderance in 
economic importance and often occasion economic 
disturbances comparable with traumatic neuroses. The 
impulses arising from the instincts do not belong to the 
type of bound nervous processes but of freely mobile 
processes which press towards discharge. The 
manifestations of a compulsion to repeat (which is 
described as occurring in the early activities of infantile 
mental life as well as among the events of psychoanalytic 
treatment) exhibit to a high degree an instinctual 
character and, when they act in opposition to the 
pleasure principle, give the appearance of some demonic 
force at work. It seems that an instinct is an uige 
inherent in organic life to restore an earlier state of 
things which the living entity has been obliged to 
abandon under the pressure of external disturbing 
forces. The instincts which watch over the destinies of 
the elementary organisms that survive the whole 
individual which provide them with a safe shelter while 
they are defenseless against the stimuli of the external 
world, which bring about their meeting with other germ 
cells, etc., constitute the group of the sexual instincts. 
These instincts are peculiarly conservative in their 
resistance tr external influences and that they preserve 
life itself. Apart from the sexual instincts, there are no 
instincts that do not seek to restore an earlier state of 
things. Both higher development and involution might 
be the consequences of adaption to the pressure of 
external forces; and in both cases, the part played by 
instincts might be limited to the retention of an 
obligatory modification. What appears in a majority of 
individuals as an untiring impulsion towards perfection 
can be understood as a result of the instinctual 
repression upon which is based all that is most precious 
in human civilization. The repressed instinct never ceases 



117 



0 



126 



1920G 18/44 



to strive for complete satisfaction. It is concluded that 
there is no instinct towards perfection at work in human 
beings. The difference in the amount between the 
pleasure of satisfaction which is demanded and that 
which is actually achieved is what provides the driving 
factor. 



1920G 18/44 

Beyond the pleasure principle (1920). Part VI. Biological 
arguments for death instincts. Part VII. Summary. 

The ego instincts exercise pressure towards death 
while the sexual instincts exercise pressure towards 
prolongation of life. It is hypothesized that the ego 
instincts arise from the coming to life of inanimate 
matter and seek to restore the inanimate while sexual 
instincts aim at conjugation of the germ cell. Without 
this union the cell dies. The assumption that death is 
internal (natural) is discussed. Biological experiments 
dealing with organisms such as ciliate infusorian give the 
following 2 facts: if 2 of the animalculae, at the moment 
before they show signs of senescene, are able to 
conjugate, they are saved from growing old and become 
rejuvenated. It is also probable that infusoria die a 
natural death as a result of their own vital processes. It is 
concluded that biology does not contradict the 
recognition of the death instincts. Psychoanalysis ob- 
served the regularity with which libido is withdrawn 
from the object and directed to the ego. By studying the 
libidinal development of children it was concluded that 
the ego is the true and original reservoir of libido, and 
that it is only from that reservoir that libido is extended 
onto objects. A portion of the ego instincts was seen to 
be libidinal and sexual instincts operated in the ego. 
Thus the distinction between these 2 instincts has 
changed from qualitative to topographical. We cannot 
ascribe to the sexual instinct the characteristic of a 
compulsion to repeat. The dominating tendency of 
mental life (and perhaps of nervous life) is the effort to 
reduce, keep constant, or remove internal tension due to 
stimuli, a tendency which finds expression in the 
pleasure principle; our recognition of this fact is a major 
reason for believing in the existence of death instincts. 
One of the earliest and most important functions of the 
mental apparatus is to bind the instinctual impulses 
which impinge it, to replace the primary process 
prevailing in them by the secondary process and convert 
their freely mobile cathectic energy into a mainly 
quiescent cathexis. The pleasure principle is a tendency 
operating in the service of a function to free the mental 
apparatus from excitation or to keep the amount of 
excitation in it constant or as low as possible. At the 
beginning of mental life the struggle for pleasure was far 
more intense than later but not so unrestricted. 



192IC 18/67 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Editor’s note. (1955). 

Freud’s letter showed that the first idea of an 
explanation of group psychology occurred to him during 
the spring of 1919. In February, 1920, he was working 
at the subject and he had written a first draft in August 
of the same year. It waj not until February, 1921, 
however, that he began giving it its final form. There is 
little direct connection between this work and Beyond 
the Pleasure Principle. The trains of thought which 
Freud takes up in Group Psychology and the Analysis of 
the Ego are more especially derived from the fourth 
essay in Totem and Taboo and his papers on narcissism 
and Mourning and Melancholia. The work is important 
in 2 different directions. On the one hand it explains the 
psychology of groups on the basis of changes in the 
psychology of the individual mind. On the other hand it 
carries a stage further Freud’s investigation of the 
anatomical structure of the mind. 

1921C 18/69 

Group psychology and analysis of the ego (1921). Part I: 
Introduction. 

Individual psychology is concerned with the 
individual man and explores the paths by which he seeks 
to find satisfaction for his instinctual impulses. In the 
individual’s mental life someone el c e is invariably 
involved, as a model, as an object, as a helper, or as an 
opponent. The contrast between social and narcissistic 
mental acts falls wholly within the domain of individual 
psychology, and is not well calculated to differentiate it 
from a social or group psychology. The individual in the 
relations to his parents and to his brothers and sisters, to 
the person he is in love with, to his friend, and to his 
physician, comes under the influence of only a single 
person, or of a very small number of persons, each one 
of whom has become enormously important to him. 
Group psychology is concerned with the individual man 
as a member of a race, of a nation, of a caste, of a 
profession, or an institution, or as a component part of a 
crowd of people who have been organized into a group 
at some particular time for some definite purpose. 
Group psychology embraces an immense number of 
separate issues and offers to investigators countless 
problems which have hitherto not even been properly 
distinguished from one another. 

1921C 18/72 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Part II: Le Bon’s description of the group mind. 

Le Bon’s description of the group mind is discussed. 
If the individuals in a group are combined into a unity. 



118 



127 



1921C 18/93 



there must be something to unite them, and this bond 
might be precisely the thing that is characteristic of a 
group. Le Bon tliinks that the particular acquirements of 
individuals become obliterated in a group, and that in 
this way their distinctiveness vanishes. The racial 
unconscious emerges; what is heterogenous is submerged 
in what is homogeneous. The mental superstructure, the 
development of which in individuals shews such 
dissimilarities, is removed, and the unconscious 
foundations, which are similar in everyone, stand 
exposed to view, in a group, the individual is brought 
under conditions which allow him to throw off the 
repressions of his unconscious instinctual impulses. The 
apparently new characteristics which he then displays 
are in fact the manifestations of this unconscious. Le 
Bon believes that the individuals in a group display new 
characteristics which they have not previously possessed. 
Three factors are put forth as reasons for this: 1) the 
individual forming part of a group acquires a sentiment 
of invincible power which allows him to yield to 
instincts which, had he been alone, he would perforce 
have kept under restraint; 2) contagion; and 3) 
suggestibility. A group is impulsive, changeable, and 
irritable. It is led almost exclusively by the unconscious. 
A group is credulous and open to influence, it has no 
critical faculty, and the improbable does not exist for it. 
A group is subject to the magical power of words. 
Groups have never thirsted after truth. 

1921C 18/82 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Part III: Other accounts of collective mental life. 

The 2 theses which comprise the most important of 
Le Bon’s opinions, those touching upon the collective 
inhibition of intellectual functioning and the heightening 
of affectivity in groups, had been formulated shortly 
before by Sighele . However, the group mind is capable 
of creative genius in the field of intelligence, as is shown 
above all by language itself, as well as by folksong, 
folklore and the like. The most remarkable and also the 
most important result of the formation of a group is the 
exaltation or intensification of emotion produced in 
every member of it. In McDougall’s opinion, men’s 
emotions are stirred in a group to a pitch that they 
seldom or never attain under other conditions. The 
manner in which individuals are carried away by a 
common impulse is by means of emotional contagion. A 
group impresses the individual as being an unlimited 
power and an insurmountable peril. Five principal 
conditions for raising collective mental life to a higher 
level are enumerated by McDougall. 1) There should be 
some degree of continuity of existence in the group. 2) 
In the individual member of the group, some definite 
idea should be formed of the nature, composition, 
functions and capacities of the group. 3) The group 



should be brought into interaction with other groups. 4) 
The group should possess traditions, customs and habits. 
5) The group should have a definite structure. 

1921C 18/88 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego^(192t). 
Part IV: Suggestion and libido. 

Suggestion and libido are investigated. An individual 
in a group is subject, through its influence, to what is 
often a profound alteration in his mental activity. 
Rational factors do not cover the observable 
phenomena. What is usually offered as an explanation is 
suggestion. Suggestion is actually an irreducible, 
primitive phenomenon, a fundamental fact in the mental 
life of man. An attempt at using the concept of libido is 
presented for the purpose of throwing light upon group 
psychology. Libido is an expression taken from the 
theory of the emotions. We call by that name the 
energy, regarded as a quantitative magnitude, of those 
instincts which have to do with all that may be 
comprised under the word love. Psychoanalysis gives 
these love instincts the name of sexual instincts. It is 
supposed that love relationships also constitute the 
essence of the group mind.- A group is clearly held 
together by a power of some kind: to what power could 
this feat be Jitter ascribed than to Eros? If an individual 
gives up his distinctiveness in a group and lets its other 
members influence him by suggestion, it gives one the 
impression that he does it because he feels the need of 
being in harmony with them rather than in opposition to 
them. 



1921C 18/93 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Part V: Two artificial groups. The church and the army. 

Two artificial groups, the Church and the army, are 
examined. In a Church as well as in an army, however 
different the 2 may be in other respects, the same 
illusion holds good of there being a head who loves all 
the individuals in the group with an equal love. 
Everything depends upon this illusion. In these 2 
artificial groups, each individual is bound by libidinal 
ties on the one hand to the leader (.Christ, the 
Commander in Chief) and on the other hand to the 
other members of the group. The essence of a group lies 
in the libidinal ties existing in it. Panic arises if a group 
becomes disintegrated; the mutual ties have ceased to 
exist, and a gigantic and senseless fear is set free. Panic 
fear presupposes a relaxation in the libidinal structure of 
the group and reacts to that relaxation in a justifiable 
manner. 



119 

128 



45S-bH2 O - 72 - « 



1921C 18/100 



1921C 18/100 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Part VI: Further problems and lines of work. 

A mere collection of people is not a group. In any 
collection of people the tendency to form a 
psychological group may very easily come to the fore. 
The evidence of psychoanalysis shows that almost every 
intimate emotional relation between 2 people which 
lasts for some time contains a sediment of feelings of 
aversion and hostility, which only escapes perception as 
a result of repression. This is less disguised in the 
common wrangles between buisness partners or in the 
grumbles of a subordinate at his superior. In the 
undisguised antipathies and the aversions which people 
feel towards strangers, we may recognize the expression 
of self-love, of narcissism. This self-love works for the 
preservation of the individual. But when a group is 
formed, the whole of this intolerance vanishes, 
temporarily or permanently, within the group. The same 
thing occurs in men’s social relations as has become 
familiar to psychoanalytic research in the course of the 
development of the individual libido. The libido attaches 
itself to the satisfaction of the great vital needs, and 
chooses as its first objects the people who have a share in 
that process. If therefore in groups, narcissistic self-love 
is subject to limitations which do not operate outside 
them, that is cogent evidence that the essence of a group 
formation consists in new kinds of libidinal ties among 
the members of .'he group. 

1921C 18/105 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Part VII: Identification. 

Identification is known to psychoanalysis as the 
earliest expression of an emotional tie with another 
person. It plays a part in the early history of the Oedipus 
complex. There are 3 sources of identification. First, 
identification is the original form of emotional ties with 
an object; secondly, in a regressive way it becomes a 
substitue for a libidinal object tie, as it were by means of 
introjection of the object into the ego, and thirdly, it 
may arise with any new perception of a common quality 
shared with some other person who is not an object of 
the sexual instinct. The mutual tie between members of 
a group is in the nature of an identification based upon 
an important emotional common quality. 

1921C 18/111 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Part VIII: Being in love and hypnosis. 

Being in love is an object cathexis on the part of the 
sexual instincts with a view to sexual satisfaction, a 
cathexis which expires when this aim has been reached. 
The loved object enjoys a certain amount of freedom 



from criticism; all its characteristics are valued more 
highly than those of people who are not loved, or than 
its own were at a time when it itself was not loved. The 
tendency which falsifies judgment in this respect is that 
of idealization. Traits of humility, of the limitation of 
narcissism and of self-injury occur in every case of being 
in love. This happens especially easily with love that is 
unhappy and cannot be satisfied; for in spite of 
everything each sexual satisfaction always involves a 
reduction in sexual overvaluation. Contemporaneously 
with this devotion of the ego to the object, the functions 
allotted to the ego ideal cease to operate. The object has 
been put in the place of an ego ideal. From being in love 
to hypnosi: is only a short step. This is the same humble 
subjection, the same compliance, the same absence of 
criticism, towards the hypnotist as towards the love 
object. The hypnotic relation is a group formation with 
2 members. A formula for the libidinal constitution of 
groups is presented: a primary group is a number of 
individuals who have put the same object in the place of 
their ego ideal and have consequently identified 
themselves with ont mother in their ego. 

1921C 18/117 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Part IX: The herd instinct. 

The herd instinct is discussed. Trotter derives the 
mental phenomena that are described as occurring in 
groups from a herd instinct (gregariousness), which is 
innate in human beings just as in other species of 
animals. Biologically, he says, this gregariousness is an 
analogy to multicellularity and a continuation of it. In 
terms of the libido theory, it is a further manifestation 
of the tendency which proceeds from the libido and 
which is felt by all living beings of the same kind, to 
combine in more and more comprehensive units. Trotter 
gives, as the list of instincts which he considers as 
primary, those of self-preservation, of nutrition, of sex, 
and of the herd. Social feeling is based upon the reversal 
of what was first a hostile feeling into a positively toned 
tie in the nature of an identification. The demand for 
equality in a group applies only to its members and not 
to the leader. All the members must be equal to one 
another, but they all want to be ruled by one person. 
Freud concludes that man is not a herd animal, but 
rather, he is a horde animal, an individual creature in a 
horde led by a chief. 

1921C 18/122 

Group psychology' and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Part X: The group and the primal horde 

Human groups exhibit the picture of an individual of 
superior strength among a troop of equal companions, a 
picture which is also contained in the idea of the primal 
horde. The psychology of such a group, the dwindling of 



120 






1920A 18/146 






/ 



the conscious individual personality, the focusing of 
thoughts and feelings into a common direction, the 
predominance of the affective side of the mind and of 
unconscious psychical life, the tendency to the 
immediate carrying out of intentions as they emerge, 
corresponds to a state of regression to a primitive mental 
activity, of just such a sort as is ascribed to the primal 
horde. The primal father prevented his sons from 
satisfying their directly sexual impulsions; he forced 
them into abstinence and consequently into the 
emotional ties with him and with one another. Whoever 
became his successor was given the possibility of sexual 
satisfaction. The fixation of the libido to woman and the 
possibility of satisfaction without any need for delay or 
accumulation made an end of the importance of those of 
his sexual impulsions that were inhibited in their aim, 
and allowed his narcissism always to rise to its full 
height. The uncanny and coercive characteristics of 
group formations, which are shown in the phenomena of 
suggestion that accompany them, may be traced back to 
the fact of their origin from the primal horde. The leader 
of the group is still the dreaded primal father; the group 
still wishes to be governed by unrestricted force; it has 
an extreme passion for authority. 

1921C 18/129 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Part XI: A differentiating grade in the ego. 

Each individual is a component part of numerous 
groups; he is bound by ties of identification in many 
directions, and he has built up his ego ideal upon 
the most various models. Each individual therefore has a 
share in numerous group minds and he can also raise 
himself above them to the extent of having a scrap of 
independence and originality. In many individuals, the 
separation between the ego and the ego ideal is not very 
far advanced; the 2 still coincide readily; the ego has 
often preserved its earlier narcissistic self-complacency. 
There are people, the general color of whose mood 
oscillates periodically from an excessive depression 
through some kind of intermediate state to an exalted 
sense of well-being. The foundation of these 
spontaneous oscillations of mood is unknown. In cases 
of mania, the ego and the ego ideal have fused together, 
so that the person, in a mood of triumph and 
self-satisfaction, disturbed by no self-criticism, can enjoy 
the abolition of his inhibitions, his feelings of 
consideration for others, and his self-reproaches. 

1921C 18/134 

Group psychology and the analysis of the ego (1921). 
Part XII: Postscript. 

The distinction between identification of the ego 
with an object and replacement of the ego ideal by an 



object finds an illustration in 2 artificial groups, the 
army and the Christian Church. A soldier takes his 
superior as his ideal, while he identifies himself with his 
equals. The Church requires that the position of the 
libido, which is given by group formation, should be 
supplemented. The development of the libido in children 
has made us acquainted with the first example of sexual 
instincts which are inhibited in their aims. The first 
configuration of the child’s love, which in typical cases 
takes the shape of the Oedipus complex, succumbs from 
the beginning of the period of latency onwards to a wave 
of repression. Sexual impulsions that are inhibited in 
their aims arise out of the directly sexual ones when 
internal or external obstacles make the sexual aims 
unattainable. In the history of the development of the 
family there have been group relations of sexual love; 
but the more important sexual love became for the ego, 
and the more it developed the characteristics of being in 
love, the more it required to be limited to 2 people. 
Being in love is based on the simultaneous presence of 
directly sexual impulsions and of sexual impulsions that 
are inhibited in their aims, while the object draws a part 
of the subject’s narcissistic ego libido to itself. Hypnosis 
resembles being in love in being limited to 2 persons. 
The group multiples this process. Neurosis stands outside 
this series. 

1920A 18/146 

The psychogenesis of a case of homosexuality in a 
woman (1920). Parti. 

Homosexuality in women has not only been ignored 
by the law, but has also been neglected by 
psychoanalytic research. A single case is presented and 
discussed. A beautiful and clever girl of 18, belonging to 
a family of good standing, had aroused displeasure and 
concern in her parents by the devoted adoration with 
which she pursued a certain society lady who was about 
10 years older than herself. It was well known that this 
lady lived with a friend, a married woman, and had 
intimate relations with her, while at the same time she 
carried on promiscuous affairs with a number of men. 
The girl appeared in the most frequented streets in the 
company of her undesirable friend, being thus quite 
neglectful of her own reputation. However, she 
disdained no means of deception, no excuses and no lies 
that would make meetings with her possible and cover 
them. About 6 months after she attempted to commit 
suicide, her parents sought medical advice. There was 
something about the daughter’s homosexuality that 
aroused the deepest bitterness in the father, and he was 
determined to combat it with all the means in his power. 
The mother did not take her daughter’s infatuation so 
tragically as did the father, nor was so incensed at it. 
The girl was not in any way ill. The patient had not 
enjoyed anything beyond a few kisses and embraces with 



121 

130 




1920A 18/155 

the object of her adoration; her genital chasity had 
remained intact. There was no obvious deviation from 
the feminine physical type, nor any menstrual 
disturbance. 

1920A 18/155 

The psychogenesis of a case of homosexuality in a 
woman (1920). Part II. 

A case of homosexuality in a woman is presented. In 
childhood the girl had passed through the normal 
attitude characteristic of the feminine, she did not 
remember any sexual traumas in early life, nor were any 
discovered by the analysis. During the prepubertal years 
at school she gradually became acquainted with the facts 
of sex, and she received this knowledge with mixed 
feelings of lasciviousness and frightened aversion, in a 
way which may be normal. At the age of 13 and 14 she 
displayed a tender and, according to general opinion, 
exaggerated affection for a small boy, not quite 3 years 
old, whom she used to see regularly in a children’s 
playground. After a short time she grew indifferent to 
the boy, and began to take an interest in mature, but still 
youthful, women. The manifestations of this interest 
soon brought upon her a severe chastisement at the 
hands of her father. The birth of a third brother when 
she was about 16 was a significant event. Just when the 
girl was experiencing the revival of her infantile Oedipus 
complex at puberty she became conscious of the wish to 
have a male child (unconscious was the wish for her 
father’s child, in his image). Because she did not bear the 
child, and her unconsciously hated rival, her mother, did 
bear. a child, the patient became resentful and 
embittered and turned away from her father and from 
men altogether. Before it happened her libido was 
concentrated on a maternal attitude, while afterwards 
she became a homosexual attracted to mature women, 
and remained so ever since. This libidinal position of the 
girl’s was greatly reinforced as soon as she perceived how 
much it displeased her father. The girl’s inversion 
received its final reinforcement when she found in her 
lady an object which promised to satisfy not only her 
homosexual trends, but also that part of her 
heterosexual libido which was still attached to her 
brother. 

1920 A 18/160 

The psychogenesis of a case of homosexuality in a 
woman (1920). Part III. 

A case of homosexuality in a woman is presented. In 
her behavior to her adored lady, the girl adopted the 
characteristic masculine type of love. When the girl 
learned later that her adored lady lived simply by giving 
her bodily favors, her reaction took the form of great 
compassion and of phantasies and plans for rescuing her 



beloved from these ignoble circumstances. She 
attempted suicide after her father saw them together and 
her beloved wanted to end the affair. The attempted 
suicide was the fulfillment of a punishment, and the 
fulfillment of a wish. She transferred to Freud the 
sweeping repudiation of men which had dominated her 
ever since the disappointment she had suffered from her 
father. The affective factor of revenge against her father 
made her cool reserve possible. The 2 intentions, to 
betray and to please her father, originated in the same 
complex, the former resulted from the repression of the 
latter, and the latter one was brought back by the dream 
work to the earlier one. 

1920A 18/167 

The psychogenesis of a case of homosexuality in a 
woman (1920). Part IV. 

Freud does not maintain that every girl who 
experiences a disappointment such as that of the longing 
for love that springs from the Oedipus attitude at 
puberty will, necessarily on that account, fall a victim to 
homosexuality. Even in a normal person it takes a 
certain time before the decision in regard to the sex of 
the love object is finally made. Homosexual enthusiasms, 
exaggerated strong friendships tinged with sensuality, are 
common enough in both sexes during the first years 
after puberty. The analysis showed that the girl had 
brought along with her from her childhood a strongly 
masked masculinity complex. It is concluded that this is 
a case of congenital homosexuality which became fixed 
and unmistakably manifest only in the period following 
puberty. Mental sexual character and object choice do 
not necessarily coincide. The mystery of homosexuality 
is a question of 3 sets of characteristics: physical sexual 
characters (physical hermaphroditism), mental sexual 
characters (masculine or feminine attitude), and kind of 
object choice. 

1941D 18/175 

Psycho-analysis and telepathy (1941; 1921). Editor’s 
note (1955) and introduction. 

Psychoanalysis and Telepathy is the first of Freud’s 
papers on telepathy, but was never published in his 
lifetime, though the greater part of the material in it was 
included in various forms in his later published papers on 
the subject. It does not follow that an intensified 
interest in occultism must involve a danger to 
psychoanalysis. The immense majority of occultists are 
not driven by a desire for knowledge or by a sense of 
shame that science has so long refused to take 
cognizance of what are indisputable problems or by a 
desire to conquer this new sphere of phenomena. They 
are convinced believers who are looking for confirmation 
and for something that will justify them in openly 



122 

131 



1922 A 18/208 



confessing their faith. There is little doubt that if 
attention is directed to occult phenomena the outcome 
will very soon be that the occurrence of a number of 
them will be confirmed; and it will probably be a very 
long time before an acceptable theory covering these 
new facts can be arrived at. At the very first 
confirmation, the occultists will proclaim the triumph of 
their views. 



1941D 18/181 

Psychoanalysis and telepathy (1941; 1921). Parts 1 & II. 

Three examples of telepathy are presented and 
discussed. A young man going through analysis told 
Freud that a fortune teller told him that his 
borther-in-law would die of crayfish or oyster poisoning 
in July or August. His brother-in-law did not die but was 
very seriously ill at that time from crayfish poisoning. 
This is interpreted as the communication (thought 
transference) of an unconscious, repressed death wish 
against his brother-in-law to the fortune teller. The 
second case concerns the eldest girl of a family of 5 who 
married well but had no cltildren. Because of the lack of 
children due to her husband’s inability to produce them, 
she became depressed and was hospitalized. After 10 
years of illness, she was treated by Freud at which time 
she related that at the age of 27, she removed her 
wedding ring, placed her hand down in a plate of sand, 
and had a fortune teller announce that she would be 
married and have 2 children by the age of 32. She was 
now 40 years old and had no children. The patient’s 
mother had not married till she was 30 and, in her 
thirty-second year, she gave birth to 2 children. The 
third episode discussed a graphologist, Rafael 
Schermann. The phenomenon of thought transference 
occurred between the graphologist and one of Freud’s 
patients who eventually broke off an affair he was 
having and married a girl of whom Schermann approved. 



1922A 18/196 

Dreams and telepathy (1922). Editor’s note (1955) and 
introduction. 

The relation of the telepathic occurrences to dreams, 
or more exactly, to the theory of dreams, is presented. 
Freud maintains that the 2 have little to do with each 
other, and that if the existence of telepathic dreams 
were to be established there would be no need to alter 
the conception of dreams in any way. The material on 
which the communication is based is very slight. During 
some 27 years as an analyst, Freud had never been in a 
position to observe a truly telepathic dream of any of his 
patients. 



1922A 18/200 

Dreams and telepathy (1922). Part 1. 

Dreams and telepathy are discussed. One of Freud’s 
patients dreamed that his wife had twins. His daughter 
was pregnant but she was not expecting her confinement 
for 4 weeks. The next day, he received a telegram from 
his son-in-law that his daughter had had twins. The 
dream goes into great detail of the likeness of the 
cluldren to the parents, discusses the color of their hair 
and the probable change of color at a later age. In the 
dream the dreamer’s second wife had twins. The 
occurrence, however, was that his daughter had given 
birth to twins in the distant home. If we consult the 
associative material to this dream, it shows, in spite of its 
sparsencss, that an intimate bond of feeling existed 
between the father and daughter, a bond of feeling 
which is so usual and so natural that we ought to cease 
to be ashamed of it, one that in daily life merely finds 
expression as a tender interest and is only pushed to its 
logical conclusion in dreams. Two conceptions of the 
dream are presented. According to the first, the dream is 
a reaction to a telepathic message: ‘your daughter has 
just brought twins into the world.’ According to the 
second an unconscious process of thought underlies the 
dream, which may be reproduced somewhat as follows: 
‘Today is the day the confinement should take place if 
the young people in Berlin are really out in their 
reckoning by a month, as 1 suspect. And if my first wife 
were still alive, she certainly would not be content with 
1 grandchild. To please her there would have to be at 
least twins. All dreams come from within, are products 
of our mental life, whereas the very conception of the 
purely ‘telepathic dream’ lies in its being a perception of 
something external, in relation to which the mind 
remains passive and receptive. 

1922A 18/208 

Dreams and telepathy (1922). Part II. 

The second case concerning the relationship between 
dreams and telepathy is not a telepathic dream, but a 
dream that has recurred from childhood onwards, in a 
person who has had many telepathic experiences. In the 
recurrent dreams, the dreamer saw a tongue of land 
surrounded by water. The waves were being driven 
forward and then back by the breakers. On this piece of 
land stood a palm tree, bent somewhat towards the 
water. A woman had her arm wound round the stem of 
the palm and was bending low towards the water, where 
a man was trying to reach the shore. At last she lay 
down on the ground, held tightly to the palm tree with 
her left hand and stretched out her right hand as far as 
she could towards the man in the water, but without 
reaching him. The dream is a rescuing from water, a 
typical birth dream. The tree trunk is a phallic symbol. 



132 



123 



1922B 18/221 



The man’s face remained hidden. It must have been her 
father. The instances of telepathic messages belonged to 
the sphere of the Oedipus complex. Telepathy has no 
relation to the essential nature of dreams. It is an 
incontestable fact that sleep creates favorable conditions 
for telepathy. Just as sleep is not indispensable to the 
occurrence of telepathic messages, dream formation does 
not necessarily wait for the onset of sleep before it 
begins. If the phenomenon of telepathy is only an 
activity of the unconscious mind, the laws of 
unconscious mental life may then apply to this 
telepathy. 

1922B 18/221 

Some neurotic mechanisms in jealousy, paranoia and 
homosexuality (1922). 

Jealousy is an affective state, like grief, that may be 
described as normal. There are 3 layers or grades of 
jealousy: competitive or normal, projected, and 
delusional jealousy. Normal jealousy is compounded of 
grief, the pain caused by the thought of losing the loved 
object, and of the narcissistic wound, in so far as this is 
distinguishable from the other wound. Projected 
jealousy is derived in both men and women either from 
their own actual unfaithfulness in real life or from 
impusles towards it which have succumbed to repression. 
Delusional jealousy has its origin in repressed impulses 
towards unfaithfulness; but the object in these cases is of 
the same sex as the subject. Cases of paranoia are not 
usually amenable to analytic investigation. A case of 
paranoia was presented that was of a youngish man with 
a fully developed paranoia of jealousy, the object of 
which was his impeccably faithful wife. After he broke 
up an affair he had been having, his projected jealousy 
broke out. Since in paranoia it is precisely the most 
loved person of the same sex that becomes the persecu- 
tor, tliis reversal of affect takes its origin from the 
ambivalence of feeling while the nonfulfillment of tliis 
claim for love strengthens it. This ambivalence thus 
serves the same purpose for the persecuted paranoiac as 
jealousy in the patient, that of a defense against 
homosexuality. The whole of the patient’s youth was 
governed by a strong attachment to his mother of whom 
he was her favorite son. Another case of persecutory 
paranoia was presented in which the patient was both a 
rebel and a submissive son. After his father’s death he 
denied himself enjoyment of woman out of guilt. His 
actual relations with other men were clearly dominated 
by suspiciouness. The qualitative factor, the presence of 
certain neurotic formations, has less practical signifi- 
cance than the quantitative factor, the degree of 
attention or, the amount of cathexis that these struc- 
tures are able to attract to themselves. The typical 
process of homosexuality is that a few years after the 
termination of puberty a young man, who has hitherto 



been strongly fixated to his mother, changes his attitude; 
identifies with his mother and looks for love objects in 
whom he can rediscover himself, and whom he might 
love as his mother loved him. The choice is towards a 
narcissistic object which is readier to hand and easier to 
put into effect than movement towards the opposite sex. 
Another mechanism of homosexual object choice, its 
origin in male sibling rivalry, is discussed. 

1923A 18/234 

Two encyclopedia articles (1923). (A). Psycho-analysis. 

The following 29 topics pertaining to psychoanalysis 
are summarized: history of psychoanalysis; catharsis; the 
transition to psychoanalysis (from belief in hypnoid 
states to repression and defense); abandonment of 
hypnosis; free association; the ‘Fundamental Technical 
Rule’ (in which the patient is required to put himself in 
the position of an attentive and dispassionate self- 
-observed, to read off the surface of his consciousness, 
and to make a duty of complete honesty while not 
holding back any idea from communication); psycho- 
analysis as an interpretative art; the interpretation of 
parapraxes and haphazard acts; the interpretation of 
dreams; the dynamic theory of dream formation 
(involving wish fulfillment); symbolism; the etiological 
significance of sexual life; infantile sexuality; the de- 
velopment of the libido; the process of finding an object, 
and the Oedipus Complex; the diphasic onset of sexual 
development; the theory of repression; transference; the 
cornerstones of psychoanalytic theory; later history of 
psychoanalysis; more recent advances in psychoanalysis; 
narcissism; development of technique; psychoanalysis as 
the therapeutic procedure; comparison between psycho- 
analysis and hypnotic and suggestive methods; the 
relation of psychoanalysis to psychiatry; criticisms and 
misunderstandings of psychoanalysis; the nonmedical 
applications and correlations of psychoanalysis; and 
psychoanalysis as an empirical science. 

1923 A 18/255 

Two encyclopedia articles (1923). (B). The libido 
theory. 

Libido is a term used in the theory of the instincts Tor 
describing the dynamic manifestation of sexuality. The 
first sphere of phenomena to be studied by psycho- 
analysis comprised what are known as the transference 
neuroses. It was found that their symptoms came about 
by sexual instinctual impulses being rejected by the 
subject’s personality (his ego) and then finding ex- 
pression by circuitous paths through the unconscious. 
What is described as the sexual instinct turns out to be 
of a highly composite nature and is liable to disintegrate 
once more into its component instincts. Each com- 
ponent instinct is unalterably characterized by its 



o 



133 



1921 A 18/269 



source, that is , by the region or zone of the body from 
which its excitation is derived. The pathogenic process in 
schizophrenia (dementia praecox) is the withdrawal of 
the libido from objects and its introduction into the ego, 
while the clamorous symptoms of the disease arise from 
the vain struggles of the libido to find a pathway back to 
objects. Instincts are characterized as tendencies in- 
herent in living substance towards restoring an earlier 
state of tilings. Both classes of instincts, Eros as well as 
the death of instinct, have been in operation and 
working against each other from the first origin of life. 

1920B 18/263 

A note on the prehistory of the technique of analysis 
(1920). 

A book by Havelock Ellis which bears the title of The 
Philosophy of Conflict includes an essay on “Psycho- 
analysis in Relation to Sex.” The aim of this essay is to 
show that the writings of the creator of analysis should 
be judged not as a piece of scientific work but as an 
artistic production. Havelock Ellis’s wide reading 
enabled him to bring forward an author who practiced 
and recommended free association as a technique, 
though for purposes other than Freud’s, and thus has a 
claim to be regarded as a forerunner of psychoanalysis. 
In 1857, Dr. J. J. Garth Wilkinson published a volume of 
mystic doggerel verse written by what he considered a 
new method, the method of impression. A theme was 
chosen and everything that thereafter impressed the 
mind was written down. In Schiller’s correspondence 
with Komer, the great poet and thinker recommended 
anyone who desires to be productive to adopt the 
method of free association. Dr. Hugo Dubowitz drew Dr. 
Ferenczi’s attention to a short essay covering only 4‘A 
pages by Ludwig Borne. The essay advises to take a few 
sheets of paper and for 3 days, write down, without 
fabrication or hypocrisy, everything that comes into 
your head. When 3 days have passed you will be quite 
out of your senses with atonishment at the new and 
unheard of thoughts you have had. Freud had been 
greatly influenced by Borne’s work from the age of 14 
on. 

1920D 18/266 

Associations of a four-year-old child (1920). 

The associations of a 4-year-old child are presented. 
The child said that if Emily gets married, she’ll have a 
baby. She knows that when anyone gets married, a baby 
always comes. The girl said that she knov/S a lot besides. 
She knows that trees grow in the ground and that God 
made the world. What the girl was trying to say was that 
babies grow inside their mother. She symbolically 
replaced the mother to Mother Earth. In her last remark 



she replaced the direct thought that it’s all the work of 
the father by the appropriate sublimation, that God 
makes the world. 



1920C 18/267 

Dr. Anton von Freund (1920). 

Dr. Anton von Freund, who was General Secretary of 
the International Psychoanalytical Association since the 
Budapest Congress in September 1918, died on January 
20, 1920, in a Vienna sanatorium, a few days after 
completing his fortieth year. He used his material powers 
to assist others and to soften the hardness of their 
destiny as well as to sharpen in all directions the sense of 
social justice. When, during his last years, he came to 
know psychoanalysis, it seemed to him to promise the 
fulfillment of his 2 great wishes. He set himself the task 
of helping the masses by psychoanalysis and of making 
use of the therapeutic effects of that medical technique 
in order to mitigate the neurotic suffering of the poor. 
With the concurrence of Dr. Stephan von Barczy, the 
then Burgomaster, he assigned a sum of money for the 
foundation of a psychoanalytic institute in Budapest, in 
which analysis was to be practiced, taught, and made 
accessible to the people. It was intended to train a 
considerable number of physiciaus in this Institute who 
would receive an honorarium from it for the treatment 
of poor neurotics in an outpatient clinic. The Institute, 
furthermore, was to be a center for further scientific 
research in analysis. Von Freund’s premature death has 
put an end to these philantropic schemes, with all their 
scientific hopes. 



1921A 18/269 

Preface to J. J. Putnam’s ‘Addresses on psycho-analysis’ 
(1921). 

The preface to J. J. Putnam’s Addresses on Psycho- 
analysis is presented. Professor Putnam, who died in 
1918 at the age of 72, was not only the first American 
to interest himself in psychoanalysis, but soon became 
its most decided supporter and its most influential 
representative in America. The papers that are collected 
into a single volume were written by Putnam between 
1909 and the end of his life. They give a good picture of 
Iris relations to psychoanalysis. They show how he was 
at first occupied in correcting a provisional judgment 
which was based on insufficient knowledge; how he then 
accepted the essence of analysis, recognized its capacity 
for throwing a clear light upon the origin of human 
imperfections and failings, and how he was struck by the 
prospect of contributing towards the improvement of 
humanity along analytical lines. 



o 

ERLC 



125 



134 




1921 B 18/271 



1921B 18/271 

Introduction to J. Varendonck’s ‘The psychology of 
day-dreams’ (1921). 

The Introduction to J. Varendonck’s The Psychology 
of Day Dreams is presented. Varendonck has succeeded 
in getting hold of the mode of thought activity to whic! 
one abandons oneself during the state of distraction into 
which we readily pass before sleep or upon incomplete 
awakening. The author includes the sort of thought 
activity which he lias observed in Bleuler’s autistic 
thinking, but calls it, as a rule fore - conscious thinking. 
However, the autistic thinking of Bleuler docs not, by 
any means, correspond v/ilh the extension and the 
contents of the fore • conscious. Daydreaming does not 
owe its peculiarities to the circumstances that it pro- 
ceeds mostly fore - consciously. Even strictly directed 
reflection may be achieved without the cooperation of 
consciousness. Hie daydream, as well as the chains of 
thought studied by Varendonck, should be designated as 
freely wandering or phantastic thinking, in opposition to 
intentionally directed reflection. 

1940C 18/273 
Medusa’s Head (1940; 1922). 

An interpretation of the decapitated head of Medusa 
is presented. To decapitate is synonymous with to 
castrate. The terror of Medusa is thus a terror of 
castration that is linked to the sight of something. The 
hair upon Medusa’s head is frequently represented in 
works of art in the form of snakes, and these are derived 
from the castration complex. However frightening they 
may be in themselves, they serve as a mitigation of the 
horror, for they replace the penis, the absence of which 
is the cause of the horror. If Medusa’s head takes the 
place of a representation of the female genitals, or rather 
if it isolates their horrifying effects from their pleas- 
ure-giving ones, it may be recalled that displaying the 
gen'tals is familiar in other connections as an apotropaic 
act. The erect male organ also has an apotropaic effect. 



VOL. XIX The Ego and the Id 
and Other Works (1923-1925) 

1923B 19/3 

The ego and the id (1923). Editor’s introduction. 
(1961). 

The Ego and the Id appeared in the third week of 
April, 1923, though it had been in Freud’s mind since at 
least the previous July. The Ego and the Id is the last of 
Freud’s major theoretical works. It offers a description 
of the mind and its workings which is at first sight new 
and even revolutionary; and indeed all psychoanalytic 

126 



writings that date from after its publication bear the 
unmistakable imprint of its effects, at least in regard to 
their terminology. The forerunners of the present gen- 
eral picture of the mind had been successively the ‘Pro- 
ject’ of 1895, the seventh chapter of the Interpretation 
of Dreams and the metapsychologicai papers of 1915. A 
simple scheme underlay all of Freud’s earlier theoretical 
ideas: functionally, a repressed force endeavoring to 
make its way into activity but held in check by a repres- 
sing force, and structurally, an unconscious opposed by 
an ego. In th'; structural picture of the mind, what had 
from the first been most clearly differentiated from the 
unconscious had been the ego. It now began to appear 
that the ego itself ought partly to be described as uncon- 
scious. Being conscious was hence forward to be re- 
garded simply as a quality which might or might not be 
attached to a mental state. In The Ego and the Id, the 2 
main ideas consist of 1) the thesis of the threefold 
division of the mind and 2) the genesis of the superego. 

1923B 19/12 

The Ego and the id (1923). Preface and Part I: Con- 
sciousness and what is unconscious. 

The division of the psychical into what is conscious 
and what is unconscious is the fundamental premise of 
psychoanalysis; and it alone makes it possible for 
psychoanalysis to understand the pathological processes 
in mental life, which are as common as they are import- 
ant, and to find a place for them in the framework of 
science. Being conscious is in the first place a purely 
descriptive term, resting on perception of the most 
immediate and certain character. A psychical element is 
not as a rule conscious for a protracted length of time. 
Very powerful mental processes or ideas exist which can 
produce all the effects in mental life that ordinary ideas 
do, though they themselves do not become conscious. 
The reason why such ideas cannot become conscious is 
that a certain force opposes them, that otherwise they 
could become conscious, and that it would then be 
apparent how little they differ from other elements 
which are admittedly psychical. The stat - which the 
ideas existed before being made conscious is called re- 
pression, and we assert that the force which instituted 
the repression and maintains it is perceived as resistance 
during the work of analysis. We obtain our concept of 
the unconscious from the theory of repression. The 
latent, which is unconscious only descriptively, not in 
the dynamic sense we c .11 preconscious; we restrict the 
term unconscious to the dynamically unconscious re- 
pressed. In each individual there is a coherent organiza- 
tion of mental processes called ego; consciousness is 
attached to this ego. The ego controls the approaches to 
motility and from this ego proceeds the repressions by 
means of which it is sought to exclude certain trends in 
the mind not merely from consciousness but also from 



155 




1923B 19/48 



other forms of effectiveness and activity. Resistance, 
which is also found in the ego, is unconscious, and 
behaves like the repressed. A part of the ego may be 
unconscious, and this unconsciousness belonging to the 
ego is not latent like the preconscious. 

1923B 19/19 

The ego and the id (1923). Part II: The ego and the id. 

All our knowledge is invariably bound up with con- 
sciousness. We can come to know even the unconscious 
(Ucs) only by making it conscious. Consciousness is the 
surface of the mental apparatus. All perceptions which 
are received from without and from within ate conscious 
(Cs). The real difference between a Ucs and a precon- 
scious (Pcs) idea (thought) consists in that the former is 
carried out on some material which remains unknown, 
whereas the latter (the Pcs) is in addition brought into 
connection with word presentations. These word pre- 
sentations are residues of memories; they were at one 
time perceptions, and like all mnemonic residues they 
can become conscious again. We think of the mnemonic 
residues as being contained in systems which are directly 
adjacent to the perceptual conscious (Pcpt Cs) system, 
so that the cathexes of those residues can readily extend 
from within on to the elements of the latter system. The 
distinction between Cs and Pcs has no meaning where 
feelings are concerned; the Pcs drops out and feelings are 
either Cs or Ucs. We can look upon an individual as a 
psychical id, unknown and unconscious, upon whose 
surface rests the ego, developed from its nucleus the 
Pcpt system. Pictorially, the ego does not completely 
envelop the id, but only does so to the extent to which 
the system Pcpt forms its surface. The ego is not sharply 
separated from the id but part merges into it The re- 
pressed ego merges into the id as well, and is merely a 
part of it. The ego is that part of the id which has been 
modified by the direct influence of the external world 
through the medium of the Pcpt Cs; in a sense it is an 
extension of the surface differentiation. The ego is first 
and foremost a body ego. Not only what is lowest but 
also what is highest in the ego can be unconscious. 

1923 B 19/28 

The ego and the id (1923). Part III: The ego and the 
super-ego (ego ideal). 

The ego ideal or superego is not firmly connected 
v/ith consciousness. The transformation of an erotic 
object choice into an alteration of the ego is a method 
by which the ego can obtain control over the id. The 
transformation of object libido into narcissistic libido 
implies an abandonment of sexual aims. Behind the ego 
ideal there lies hidden an individual’s first and most 
important identification, his identification with the 
father in his own personal prehistory. In both sexes, the 

127 



relative strength of the masculine and feminine sexual 
dispositions is what determines whether the outcome of 
the Oedipus situation shall be an identification with the 
father or with the mother. The broad general outcome 
of the sexual phase dominated by the Oedipus complex 
may be taken to be the forming of a precipitate in the 
ego, consisting of the 2 identifications of father identi- 
fication and mother identification in some way unit'd 
with each other. The modification of the ego retains its 
special position; it confronts the other contents of the 
ego as an ego ideal or superego. The superego is not 
simply a residue of the earliest object choices of the id; 
it also represents an energetic reaction formation against 
those choices. The ego ideal is the heir of the Oedipus 
complex. It is easy to show that the ego ideal answers to 
everything that is expected of the higher nature of man. 

1923B 19/40 

The ego and the id (1923). Part IV: The two classes of 
instincts. 

Two classes of instincts are distinguished, one of 
which, the sexual instincts or Eros, is by far the more 
conspicuous and accessible to study. It comprises not 
merely the uninhibited sexual instinct proper and the 
instinctual impulses of an aim inhibited or sublimated 
nature derived from it, but also the self-preservative 
instinct. The second class of instincts is called the death 
instinct. It appears that, as a result of the combination 
of unicellular organisms into multicellular forms of life, 
the death instinct of the single cell can successfully be 
neutralized and the destructive impulses be diverted on 
to the external world through the instrumentality of a 
special organ. The sadistic component of the sexual 
insMnct would be a classical example of a serviceable 
instinctual fusion and the sadism which has made itself 
independent as a perversion would be typical of a defu- 
sion. Love is regularly accompanied by hate (ambiva- 
lence); in human relationships, hate is frequently a fore- 
runner of love. It seems a plausible view that the dis- 
placeable and neutral energy, which is no doubt active 
both in the ego and in the id, proceeds from the narcis- 
sistic store of libido, that is desexualized Eros. This 
displaceable libido is employed in the service of the 
pleasure principle to obviate blockages and to facilitate 
discharge. This displaceable energy may also be de- 
scribed as sublimated energy. The transformation of 
erotic libido into ego libido involves an abandonment of 
sexual aims, a desexualization. 

1923B 19/48 

The ego and the id (1923). Part V: the dependent rela- 
tionships of the ego. 

The ego is formed out of identifications which take 
the place of abandoned cathexes by the id. The first of 




136 



i 



1923B 19/60 



these identifications, the superego, owes its special posi- 
tion in relation to the ego, to 2 factors 1) it was the first 
identification and one which took place while the ego 
was still feeble, and 2) it is the heir to the Oedipus 
complex. The superego is always close to the id and can 
act as its representative towards the ego. Part of the 
sense of guilt nornia'ly remains unconscious, because the 
origin of conscience is intimately connected with the 
Oedipus complex, which belongs to the unconscious. A 
sense of guilt expresses itself differently under different 
conditions. The normal, conscious sense of guilt is based 
on the tension between the ego and the ego ideal. The 
sense of guilt is excessively strongly conscious in obses- 
sional neurosis and melancholia but remainsunconscious 
in hysteria. The obsessional neurotic, in contrast to the 
melancholic, never performs self-destruction. The id is 
totally nonmoral; the ego strives to be moral, and the 
superego can be super-moral and then become as cruel as 
only the id can be. The ego owes service io 3 masters 
and consequently, is menaced by 3 dangers: from the 
external world, from the libido of the id, and from the 
severity of the superego. The great significance which 
the sense of guilt has in the neuroses makes it con- 
ceivable that common neurotic anxiety is reinforced in 
severe cases by the generating of anxiety between the 
ego and the superego (fear of castration, of conscience, 
of death). The id has no means of showing the ego either 
love or hate. 

1923B 19/60 

The ego and the id (1923). Appendix A: the descriptive 
and the dynamic unconscious. Appendix B: The great 
reservoir of libido. 

In the descriptive sense there are 2 kinds of uncon- 
scious: the latent unconscious and the repressed uncon- 
scious. Unconscious, in its dynamic sense, covers only 
one thing, the repressed unconscious. The fact that the 
latent unconscious is only descriptively unconscious 
does not imply that it is the only thing that is descrip- 
tively unconscious. In this book Freud speaks of the id 
as “the great reservoir of libido”. This appears to contra- 
dict his reference to the ego as such a reservoir in a 
number of other writings both before and after this. The 
contradiction is diminished if we consider other passages 
where he indicates that it is the undifferentiated ego-id 
that is the original “great reservoir” and that after dif- 
ferentiation the ego becomes a storage tank for narcis- 
sistic libido. 

1923D 19/69 

A seventeenth-century demonological neurosis (1923). 
Editor’s note (1961) and introduction. 

A Seventeen-Century Demonological Neurosis was 
written in the last months of 1922. Freud’s interest in 
witchcraft, possession and allied phenomena was of long 



standing. Freud passes beyond the discussion of an indi- 
vidual case and of the limited demonological problem to 
a consideration of some of the wider questions involved 
in the adoption by males of a feminine attitude towards 
the father. The neuroses of childhood have taught us 
that a number of things can easily be seen in them with 
the naked eje which at a later age are only to be dis- 
covered after a thorough investigation. We may expect 
that the same will turn out to be true of neurotic ill- 
nesses in earlier centuries, provided that we are prepared 
to recognize them under names other than those of our 
present day neuroses. The demonological theory of 
those *ark times has won against all the somatic views of 
the period of exact science. The states of possession 
correspond to our neuroses, for the explanation of 
which we once more have recourse to psychical powers. 
In our eyes, the demons are bad and reprehensible 
wishes, derivatives of instinctual impulses that have been 
repudiated and repressed. 

1923D 19/73 

A seventeenth-century demonological neurosis (1923). 
Part I: The story of Christoph Haizmann the painter. 

The story of Christoph Haizmann the painter, who 
presented with a demonological neurosis, is discussed. 
On August 29, 1677 in a church in Pottenbrunn, he was 
seized with convulsions and later admitted these were 
due to a previous pact with the Devil in which he agreed 
in writing to belong to him in body and soul after 9 
years. This period would expire September 29, 1677. 
After the painter had undergone a prolonged period of 
penance and prayer at MariazeU, the Devil appeared to 
itim in the sacred Chapel at midnight September 8, the 
Nativity of the Virgin, in the form of a winged dragon, 
and gave him back the pact, which was written in blood. 
After a short time the painter left Mariazell in the best 
of health and went to Vienna, where he lived with a 
married sister. On October 1 1 , fresh attacks began, some 
of them very severe. They consisted in visions and ab- 
sences, in which he saw and experienced every kind of 
thing, in convulsive seizures accompanied by the most 
painful sensations. This time, however, it. was not the 
Devil who tormented him; it was by sacred figures that 
he was vexed. In May, 1678, he returned to Mariazell 
and told the reverent Fathers that his reason for return- 
ing was that he had to require the Devil to give him back 
another earlier bond, which had been written in ink. 
This time once more the Blessed Virgin and the pious 
Fathers helped him to obtain the fulfillment of his 
request. He entered the Order of the Brothers Hospital- 
lers and was again repeatedly tempted by the Evil Spirit, 
who tried to make a fresh pact. These attempts were 
repelled and Brother Chrysostomusdied of a hectic fever 
peacefully and of good comfort in 1700. 



128 




1923D 19/100 



1923D 19/79 

A seventeenth-century demonological neurosis (1923). 
Part II: The motive for the pact with the devil. 

The motive for Christoph Haizmann’s pact witli the 
Devil is discussed. Me signed to a bond with the Devil in 
order to be freed from a state of depression, which had 
been brought on by the death of his father. The bonds 
mention no undertaking given by the Devil in return for 
whose fulfillment the painter pledges his eternal bliss, 
but only a demand made by the Devil which the painter 
must satisfy. The painter was to be bound to the Devil, 
as his son, for 9 years. At the end of that time, the 
painter was to become the property, body and soul, of 
the Devil. The train of thought which motivated the 
painter in making the pact seems to have been this: his 
father’s death had made him lose his spirits and his 
capacity to work; if he could only obtain a father sub- 
stitute he might hope to regain what he had lost; in 
return for the painter’s soul the Devil was to become his 
father for 9 years. 

1923D 19/83 

A seventeenth century demonological neurosis (1923). 
Part III: The devil as father-substitute. 

The Devil is discussed as a father substitute. The Devil 
first appeared to Christoph Haizmann as an honest 
elderly citizen with a brown beard, dressed in a red cloak 
and leaning with his right hand on a stick, with a black 
dog beside him. Later on, his appearance became more 
and more terrifying: he was equipped with horns, eagle’s 
claws, and bat’s wings, and finally he appeared in the 
chapel as a flying dragon. We know that God is a father 
substitute. The ^vil demon is regarded as the antithesis 
of God and yet is very close to him in nature. God and 
the Devil were originally identical. The pact that Haiz- 
mann made with the Devil was for 9 years. The number 
9 is of great significance for neurotic phantasies. It is the 
number of months of pregnancy. Although the 9 appears 
as years, it could be interpreted as months. The female 
sexual character of the Dievil is stressed by introducing 
large pendulous breasts. It is concluded that what the 
painter is rebelling against is his feminine attitude to his 
father which culminates in a phantasy of bearing him a 
child. 

1923D 19/93 

A seventeenth century demonological neurosis (1923). 
Part IV: The two bonds. 

A remarkable detail in the story of Christoph Haiz- 
maiu is the statement that he signed 2 different bonds 
with the Devil. It is unusual for anyone to sign a bond 
with the Devil twice, in such a way that the first 
document is replaced by the second, but without losing 
its own validity. Freud’s view is that when the painter 



first came to Mariazell he spoke only of one bond, writ- 
ten in the regular way in blood, which was about to fall 
due. In Mariazell, too, he presented this bond in blood as 
the one which the demon had given back to him under 
compulsion from the Holy Mother. The painter left the 
shrine soon afterwards and went to Vienna, where he 
felt free till the middle of October. Then, however, he 
began once more to be subjected to sufferings and 
apparitions, in which he saw the work of the evil spirit. 
He again felt in need of redemption, but was faced with 
the difficulty of explaining why the exorcism in the 
Holy Chapel had not brought him a lasting deliverance. 
He invented an earlier, first bond, which was to be 
written in ink, so that its supersession in favor of a later 
bond, written in blood should seem more plausible. He 
could not avoid the awkward result that he had re- 
deemed one. the blood bond, too soon (in the eighth 
year), and the other, the black bond, too late (in the 
tenth year). 



1923D 19/100 

A seventeenth-century demonological neurosis (1923). 
Part V: The further course of the neurosis. 

The further course of the neurosis of Christoph Haiz- 
mann is presented. Examination of the painter’s diary 
affords deep insight into the motivation or exploitation 
of his neurosis. Until October 1 1 , he felt very well in 
Vienna, where he lived with a married sister; but after 
that he had fresh attacks which fell into 3 phases: First, 
temptation appeared in the form of a finely dressed 
cavalier, who tried to persuade him to throw away the 
document attesting his admission to the Brotherhood of 
the Holy Rosary. An ascetic reaction appeared. On 
October 20, a great light appeared, and a voice came 
from it, making itself known as Christ, and commanded 
him to forswear this wicked world and sarve God in the 
wilderness for 6 years. The painter’s phuutasies of temp- 
tation were succeeded by ascetic ones and finally by 
phantasies of punishment. The painter signed a bond 
with the Devil because, after his father’s death, feeling 
depressed and unable to work, he was worried about 
making a livelihood. This pact still did not help him. 
Finally, with his entrance into a Holy Order, both his 
internal struggle and his material needs came to an end. 
In his neurosis, his seizures and visions were brought to 
an end by the return of an alleged first bond. It was 
concluded that all he wanted was to make his life secure. 
He followed a path which led from his father, by way of 
the Devil as a father substitute, to the pious Fathers of 
the Church. The painter’s wretched situation in life 
would not have provoked a demonological neurosis if his 
material need had not intensified his longing for his 
father. 



0 

ERIC 



129 

138 



1923C 19/108 



1923C 19/108 

Remarks on the theory and practice of dream- 
interpretation (1923). Parts I-VI. 

In interpreting a dream there are several choices con- 
cerning technical procedures: 1) a chronological pro- 
cedure in which the dreamer brings up his associations to 
the elements of the dream in the order in which those 
elements occurred; 2) starting from one particular ele- 
ment of the dream, for example, the most striking piece 
of it or the piece with the most sensory intensity; 
3) asking the dreamer what events of the previous day 
are associated in his mind with the dream he has just 
described; and 4) leaving it to the dreamer to decide 
with which associations to the dream he shall begin. 
When the pressure of resistance is high, one may succeed 
in discovering what the things are with which the dream 
is concerned, but not what they mean. When the resist- 
ance is kept within moderate limits, the familiar picture 
of the work of interpretation comes into view: the 
dreamer’s associations begin by diverging widely from 
the manifest elements, so that a great number of subjects 
and ranges of ideas are touched on, after which, a second 
series of associations converge from these on to the 
dream thoughts that are being sought. Dreams from 
below are provoked by the strength of an unconscious 
(repressed) wish. Dreams from above correspond to 
thoughts or intentions of the day before which have 
contrived during the night to obtain reinforcemc nt from 
repressed materia! that is debarred from the ego. The 
interpretation of a dream falls into 2 phases: the phase 
in which it is translated and the phase in which it is 
judged or has its value assessed. One should not let the 
second phase influence the work of the first phase. 
Deciding on the value of a correctly translated dream is 
difficult and all other indications, including those of 
waking life, must be taken into account. 

1923C 19/113 

Remarks on the theory and practice of dream- 
interpretation (1923). Parts VII & VIII. 

The question of the value to be assigned to dreams is 
intimately related to the other question of their suscep- 
tibility to influence from suggestion by the physician. 
The fact that the manifest content of dreams is influ- 
enced by tire analytic treatment stands in no need of 
proof. Latent dream thoughts have to be arrived at by 
interpretation and can be influenced or suggested by the 
analyst. A portion of these latent dream thoughts cor- 
respond to preconscious thought formations, thought 
formations with which the dreamer might well have 
reacted to the physician’s remarks. They are perfectly 
capable of being conscious. One never exercises any 
influence on the mechanism of dream formation itself, 
on the dream work in the strict sense of the word. Every 



true dream contains indications of the repressed wishful 
impulses to which it owes the possibility of its forma- 
tion. With these and with material which refers to scenes 
from the dreamer’s past, it is often difficult to prove 
that they are not the result of suggestion; but the way in 
which fragments fit together like a complicated jigsaw 
puzzle finally convinces us that this is not so. It may 
well be that dreams during psychoanalysis succeed in 
bringing to light what is repressed to a greater extent 
than dreams outside that situation. But it cannot be 
proved, since the 2 situations are not comparable: the 
employment of dreams in analysis is something very 
remote from their original purpose. Positive transference 
gives assistance to the compulsion to repeat. 

1923C 19/118 

Remarks on the theory and practice of dream- 
interpretation (1923). Part IX. 

Dreams that occur in a traumatic neurosis are the 
only genuine exceptions and punishment dreams are the 
only apparent exceptions to the rule that dreams are 
directed towards wish fulfillment. In the latter class of 
dreams we are met by the remarkable fact that actually 
nothing belonging to the latent dream thoughts is taken 
up into the manifest content of the dream. Something 
quite different appears instead, which must be described 
as a reaction formation against the dream thoughts, a 
rejection and complete contradiction of them. This must 
be ascribed to the critical agency of the ego which has 
been temporarily reestablished even during sleep, and 
which replaces the objectionable dream wish with a 
punishment dream. Astonishment is sometimes ex- 
pressed at the fact that the dreamer’s ego can appear 2 
or more times in the manifest dream, once as himself 
and again disguised behind the figures of other people. 
During the course of the construction of the dream, the 
secondary revision has evidently sought to obliterate this 
multiplicity of the ego, which cannot fit in with any 
possible scenic situation but it is reestablished by the 
work of interpretation. Separation of the ego from an 
observing, critical, punishing agency (an ego ideal) must 
be taken into account . in the interpretation of dreams, 
and often accounts for the multiple appearances of the 
ego in the same dream. 

19251 19/125 

Some additional notes on dream-interpretation as a 
whole (1925). Editor’s note (1961). (A). The limits to 
the possibility of interpretation. 

The limits to the possibility of interpretation of 
dreams are discussed. Dreaming is an activity of play or 
phantasy. When a dream deals with a problem of actual 
life, it solves it in the manner of an irrational wish and 
not in the manner of a reasonable reflection. There is 



130 




139 



1923E 19/41 



only one useful task, only one function, that can be 
ascribed to a dream, and that is the guarding of sleep 
from interruption. A dream may be described as a piece 
of phantasy working on behalf of the maintenance of 
sleep. It is on the whole a matter of indifference to the 
sleeping ego what may be dreamt during the night so 
long as the dream performs its task, and that those 
dreams best fulfill their function about which one knows 
nothing after waking. No one can practice the interpre- 
tation of dreams as an isolated activity: it remains a part 
of the work of analysis. If one practices dream interpre- 
tation according to the sole justifiable technical pro- 
cedure, one soon notices that success depends entirely 
upon the tension of resistance between the awakened 
ego and the repressed unconscious. Because resistance is 
often strong, only a certain portion of a patient’s dream 
products can be translated and often only incompletely. 
Since many incomprehensible dreams become under- 
stood in the light of knowledge obtained later in the 
analysis it is justifiable to assert that dreams are quite 
generally mental structures that are capable of inter- 
pretation, though the situation may not always allow an 
interpretation being reached. When the interpretation of 
a dream has been discovered it is not always easy to 
decide whether it is a complete one. In that case, we 
must consider the meaning proved which is based on the 
dreamer’s association and our estimate of the situation, 
without feeling bound to reject the other meaning. 

19251 19/131 

Some additional notes on dream-interpretation as a 
whole (1925). (B). Moral responsibility for the content 
of dreams. 

Moral responsibility for the content of dreams is dis* 
cussed. The manifest content is a deception, a facade. 
When the content of the dream is spoken of, what must 
be referred to can only be the content of the precon- 
scious thoughts and of the repressed wishful impulse 
which are revealed behind the facade of the dream by 
the work of interpretation. Our interest in the genesis of 
manifestly immoral dreams is greatly reduced when we 
find from analysis that the majority of dreams are re- 
vealed as the fulfillments of immoral, egoistic, sadistic, 
perverse or incestuous, wishful impulses. Dreams do not 
always offer immoral wish fulfillments, but often ener- 
getic reactions against them in the form of punishment 
dreams. In other words, the dream censorship can not 
only express itself in distortions and the generation of 
anxiety, but can go so far as to blot out the immoral 
subject matter completely and replace it by something 
else that serves as an atonement, though it allows one to 
see what lies behind. One must hold oneself responsible 
for the evil impulses of one’s dreams. The ethical narcis- 
sism of humanity should rest content with the know- 
ledge that the fact of distortion in dreams, as well as the 



existence of anxiety dreams and punishment dreams, 
afford just as clear evidence of his moral nature as dream 
interpretation gives of the existence and strength of his 
evil nature. 

19251 19/135 

Some additional notes on dream-interpretation as a 
whole (1925). (C). The occult significance of dreams 

The occult significance of dreams is discussed. There 
would seem to be 2 categories of dreams with a claim to 
being reckoned as occult phenomena: prophetic dreams 
and telepathic dreams. In Freud’s opinion, there is no 
validity to prophetic dreams. Telepathy is not a dream 
problem: our judgment upon whether it exists or not 
need not be based on a study of telepathic dreams. 
Freud believes that there may be some truth to the 
phenomenon of telepathy. He mentions a class of ma- 
terial which is exempt from doubts which are otherwise 
justified: unfulfilled prophecies by professional fortune 
tellers. An example is given in which a fortune teller 
predicted that a woman would give birth to 2 children 
by age 32. The woman remained childless but in analysis 
at age 43 it became evident that her dominant uncon- 
scious wish at the time of the prophecy had been to have 
2 children before age 32 as her mother had done and 
thus to satisfy her wish for her own father by putting 
herself in her mother’s place. Freud concluded that the 
strongest unconscious wish had made itself manifest to 
the fortune teller by being directly transferred to him 
while his attention was being distracted by the perform- 
ances he was going through. If there are such things as 
telepathic messages, the possibility cannot be dismissed 
of their reaching someone during sleep and coming to his 
knowledge in a dream. 



1923E 19/41 

The infantile genital organization: An interpolation into 
the theory of sexuality (1923). 

The infantile genital organization is discussed. The 
main characteristic of the infantile genital organization is 
its difference from the final genital organization of the 
adult. This consists in the fact that, for both sexes, only 
one genital, namely the male one, comes into account. 
What is present, therefore, is not a primacy of the geni- 
tals, but a primacy of the phallus. The small boy per- 
ceives the distinction between men and women, but to 
begin with he has no occasion to connect it with a differ- 
ence in their genitals. The driving force which the male 
portion of the body will develop later at puberty ex- 
presses itself at this period of life mainly as an urge to 
investigate, as sexual curiosity. Many of the acts of 
exhibitionism and aggression which children commit, 
and which in later years would be judged without hesi- 
tation to be expressions of lust, prove in analysis to be 



o 

ERIC 



131 



140 




1924B 19/149 



experiments undertaken in the service of sexual research. 
In the course of these researches the child arrives at the 
discovery that the penis is not a possession which is 
common to all creatures that are like himself, and con* 
eludes that the lack is due to castration. The significance 
of the castration complex can only be rightly appre- 
ciated if its origin in the phase of phallic primacy is also 
taken into account. The child believes that it is only 
unworthy female persons that have lost their genitals. 
Women whom he respects, like his mother, retain a penis 
for a long time. The sexual polarity of male-female 
finally seen at puberty appears in different transforma- 
tions in childhood sexual development. The earliest 
antithesis is subject-object; later in the sadistic anal stage 
it is active-passive; and in the stage of infantile genital 
organization it is male-genital-castrated. 

1924B 19/149 

Neurosis and psychosis (1924). 

Neurosis and psychosis are discussed. Neurosis is the 
result of a conflict between the ego and its id, whereas 
psychosis is the analogous outcome of a similar disturb- 
ance in the relations between the ego and the external 
world. All the analyses show that the transference 
neuroses originate from the ego’s refusing to accept a 
powerful instinctual impulse in the id or to help it to 
find a motor outlet, or from the ego’s forbidding that 
impulse the object at which it is aiming. In such a case 
the ego defends itself against the instinctual impulse by 
the mechanism of repression. The repressed material 
struggles against this fate and creates a substitute repre- 
sentation, the symptom. The ego finds its unity threat- 
ened and impaired by this intruder, and it continues to 
struggle against the symptom, just as it fended off the 
original instinctual impulse. The etiology common to the 
onset of psychoneurosis and of a Psychosis always 
remains the same. It consists in a frustration, a nonful- 
fillment, of one of those childhood wishes which are 
forever undefeated and which are so deeply rooted in 
our phylogenetically determined organization. The 
pathogenic effect depends on whether the ego remains 
true to its dependence on the external world and at- 
tempts to silence the id, as iu the transference neuroses, 
or whether it lets itself be overcome by the id and thus 
torn away from reality, as in the psychoses. A third 
group of illnesses, the narcissistic neuroses, are charac- 
terized by a conflict between the ego and the superego. 
The thesis that neuroses and psychoses originate in the 
ego’s conflicts with its various ruling agencies needs to 
be supplemented in one further point. One would like to 
know in what circumstances and by what means the ego 
can succeed in merging from such conflicts, which are 
certainly always present, without falling ill. This is a new 
field of research, in which economic considerations and 
the ego’s capacity to avoid a rupture by deforming itself 
will be 2 important factors. 



1924C 19/157 

The economic problem of masochism (1924). 

The economic problem of masochism is discussed. 
Masochism comes under observation in 3 forms: as a 
condition imposed on sexual excitation, as an expression 
of the feminine nature, and as a norm of behavior. We 
may, accordingly, distinguish an erotogenic, a feminine, 
and a moral masochism. The first, the erotogenic maso- 
chism, pleasure in pain, lies at the bottom of the other 2 
forms as well. Its basis must be sought along biological 
and constitutional lines. The third form has been recog- 
nized as a sense of guilt which is mostly unconscious; 
but it can already be completely explained and fitted 
into the rest of our knowledge. Analysis of cases shows 
the subjects in a characteristically female situation; they 
signify, being castrated, or copulated with or giving birth 
to a baby. The clinical description of feminine maso- 
chism is discussed along with a theoretical explanation 
of erotogenic masochism. Feminine masochism is based 
on the primary, erotogenic masochism, on pleasure in 
pain. Erotogenic masochism accompanies the libido 
through all its developmental phases and derives from 
them its changing psychical coatings. The fear of being 
eaten by the totem animal (father) originates from the 
primitive oral organization; the wish to be beaten by the 
father comes from the sadistic anal phase which follows 
it; castration enters into the content of masochistic 
phantasies as a precipitate of the phallic stage or organi- 
zation; and from the final genital organization there arise 
the situations of being copulated with and of giving 
birth. The third form of masochism, moral masochism, is 
chiefly remarkable for having loosened its connection 
with what we recognize as sexuality, and does not need a 
loved one as one of its conditions. Individuals with this 
type of masochism give an impression of being exces- 
sively morally inhibited although not being conscious of 
this ultramorality. Moral masochism is unconscious. The 
expression “unconscious sense of guilt” means a need 
for punishment at the hands of a parental power. The 
wish to be beaten by the father is veiy close to the wish 
to have a passive (feminine) sexual relation with him and 
is only a regressive distortion of it. The sadism of the 
superego and the masochism of the ego supplement each 
other and unite to produce the same effects. 

1924D 19/173 

The dissolution of the Oedipus complex (1924). 

The dissolution of the Oedipus complex is discussed. 
The Oedipus complex reveals its importance as the 
central phenomenon of the sexual period of early child- 
hood. After that, its dissolution takes place; it succumbs 
to repression and is followed by the latency period. In 
one view, the Oedipus complex goes to its destruction 
from its lack of success. Another view is that the 
Oedipus complex must collapse because the time has 



132 



1924F 19/191 




come for its disintegration. Both of these views are 
compatible. Freud believes that what brings about the 
destruction of the child’s phallic genital organization is 
the threat of castration. To begin with, the boy does not. 
believe in the threat or obey it in the least. It is not until 
the child observes the female genitals that his unbelief is 
broken down. The child’s ego turns away from the Oedi- 
pus complex and the object cathexes are given up and 
replaced by identifications. The authority of the father 
or the parents is introjected into the ego, and there it 
forms the nucleus of the superego, which takes over the 
severity of the father and perpetuates his prohibition 
against incest, and so secures the ego from the return of 
the libidinal object cathexis. The libidinal trends belong- 
ing to the Oedipus complex are in part desexualized and 
sublimated and in part inhibited in their aim and 
changed into impulses of affection. The whole process 
has preserved the genital organ (averted its loss) and has 
paralyzed it (removed its function). This starts the 
latency period. The ego’s turning away from the Oedipus 
complex can be called repression. This process is equiva- 
lent to a destruction and an abolition of the complex. 
Here is the borderline between normal and pathological; 
if the ego has not achieved much more than a repression 
of the complex, the latter persists in an unconscious 
state in the id and will later manifest its pathological 
effects. The connections between the phallic organiza- 
tion, the Oedipus complex, the threat of castration, 
superego formation and latency period justify the 
statement that the destruction of the Oedipus complex 
is brought about by the threat of castration. In female 
children the Oedipus complex is gradually given up 
because the wish for a child (formerly a wish for a penis) 
is never fulfilled. 

1924E 19/183 

The loss of reality in neurosis and psychosis (1924). 

The loss of reality in neurosis and psychosis is dis- 
cussed. In a neurosis Ihe ego, in its dependence on 
reality, supresses a piece of the id, whereas in a psy- 
chosis, this same ego, in the service of the id, withdraws 
from a piece of reality. For a neurosis, the decisive fac- 
tor would be the predominance of the influence of 
reality, whereas for a psychosis it would be the pre- 
dominance of the id. In a psychosis, a loss of reality 
would necessarily be present, whereas in a neurosis, it 
would seem, this loss would be avoided. Every neurosis 
disturbs the patient’s relation to reality in some way and 
serves him as a means of withdrawing from reality. The 
neurosis consists in the processes which provide a com- 
pensation for the portion of the id that has been 
damaged. Neurosis is characterized as the result of a 
repression that has failed. When a psychosis comes into 
being, something analogous to the process in a neurosis 
occurs, though, of course, between different agencies of 



the mind. In neurosis, a piece of reality is avoided by a 
sort of flight, whereas in psychosis it is remodeled. In 
psychosis, the initial flight is succeeded by an active 
phase of remodeling; in neurosis, the initial obedience is 
succeeded by a deferred attempt at flight. Neurosis does 
not disavow reality, it only ignores it; psychosis disavows 
it and tries to replace it. In psychosis the transforming of 
reality is carried out upon the memorv traces and ideas 
and judgments previously derived from reality and is 
continually being enriched with fresh perceptions. This 
task of procuring perceptions to correspond to the new 
reality is effected by means of hallucination. It is 
probable that in psychosis the rejected piece of reality 
constantly forces itself upon the mind as the repressed 
instinct does in neurosis. Distinctions between neurosis 
and psychosis are a result of the topographical difference 
in the initial situation for the pathogenic conflict, 
namely whether in it the ego yielded to its allegiance to 
the real world or to its dependence on the id. 

1924F 19/19! 

A short account of psycho-analysis (1924). 

A brief history of psychoanalysis is presented. 
Psychoanalysis initially had only the single aim of under- 
standing something of the nature of the functional 
nervous diseases. The importance of hypnosis (later to 
be replaced by the method of free association plus inter- 
pretation) in the origin of psychoanalysis and in the 
study of the neuroses is discussed. Contributions of 
Breuer and Freud to the development of psychotherapy 
through introduction of the cathartic method are out- 
lined and the mechanisms of repression and resistance 
are presented. A theory which accounts for the origin, 
meaning, and purpose of neurotic symptoms includes 
emphasis on instinctual life, on mental dynamics, on the 
fact that even the apparently most obscure and arbitrary 
mental phenomena invariably have a meaning and a 
causation, the theory of psychical conflict and of the 
pathogenic nature of repression, the view that symptoms 
are substitutive satisfactions, the recognition of the 
etiological importance of sexual life, and the beginnings 
of infantile sexuality. The significance and meaning of 
dreams in psychotherapy and methods of interpretation 
are discussed. Psychoanalytic theory began to grow 
(with the development of many journals) and attracted 
followers. A list of concepts which enable the physician 
to deal with analytical material includes: libido, object 
libido, narcissistic or ego libido, and Oedipus complex. 
The importance of psychoanalysis for psychiatry drew 
attention from the intellectual world through its relation 
to normal behavior. Study of the psychical functions of 
groups of peoples (group therapy) allowed psycho- 
analysis to be proclaimed as ‘depth psychology’. The 
stresses imposed on our mental faculties by civilization 



133 

tt4;2 




1925E 19/213 



are discussed and it is concluded that it is predominately 
the sexual instinctual impulses that have succumbed to 
cultural suppression. If the mental apparatus can be 
divided into an ego, (turned towards the external world 
and equipped with consciousness) and an unconscious id 
(dominated by its instinctual needs), then psycho- 
analysis is to be described as a psychology of the id. 

1925E 19/213 

The resistances to psycho-analysis (1925). 

The resistances to psychoanalysis are discussed. 
Psychoanalysis derives nothing but disadvantages from 
its middle position between medicine and philosophy. 
Doctors regard it as a speculative system and refuse to 
believe that, like every other natural science, it is based 
on a patient and tireless elaboration of facts from the 
world of perception; philosophers, measuring it by the 
standard of then own artificially constructed systems, 
find that it starts from impossible premises such as the 
existence of unconscious mental activity, and reproach it 
because its most general concepts lack clarity and pre- 
cision. Psychoanalysis proposes that there should be a 
reduction in the strictness with which instincts are re- 
pressed and that correspondingly more play be given to 
truthfulness. By its theory of the instincts, psycho- 
analysis offended the feelings of individuals in so far as 
they regarded themselves as members of the social 
community. Psychoanalysis disposed of the fairytale of 
an asexual childhood. It demonstrated that sexual 
interest and activities occur in small children from the 
beginning of their lives. The idea is, in general, unaccept- 
able to adults who have energetically repressed their own 
memories of this period. The strongest resistances to 
psychoanalysis were not of an intellectual kind but arose 
from emotional sources. 

19/223 

The resistances to psychoanalysis (1925). Appendix: 
Extract from Schopenhauer’s ‘The world as will and 
idea’. 

An extract from Schopenhauer’s The World as Will 
and Idea is presented. In his later works, Freud made 
several references to the emphasis which Schopenhauer 
laid on the importance of sexuality. Schopenhauer wrote 
that the relation of the sexes is really the invisible 
central point of all action and conduct. It is the cause of 
war and the end of peace, the basis of what is serious, 
and the aim of the jest, the inexhaustible source of wit, 
the key to all allusions, and the meaning of all myste- 
rious hints, or all spoken offers and all stolen glances, 
the daily meditation of the young, and often also of the 
old, the hourly thought of the unchaste, and even 
against their will the constantly recurring imagination of 
the chaste, the ever-ready material of a joke, just because 



the profoundest seriousness lies at its foundation. Sexual 
passion is the most perfect manifestation of the will to 
live, its most distinctly expressed type; and the origin of 
the individual in it, and its primacy over all other desires 
of the natural man, are both in complete agreement with 
this. 

1925 A 19/227 

A note upon the ‘Mystic writing-pad’ (1925). 

The Mystic Writing Pad is a slab of dark brown resin 
or wax over which is laid a thin transparent sheet, the 
top end of which is firmly secured to the slab. The 
transparent sheet contains 2 layers, which can be 
detached from each other except at the top end. The 
upper layer is a transparent piece of celluloid. One writes 
with a pointed stylus upon the celluloid portion of the 
covering sheet which rests on the wax slab. If one wishes 
to destroy what has been written, all that is necessary is 
to raise the double covering sheet from the wax slab by a 
light pull. If, while the Mystic Pad has writing on it, the 
celluloid is cautiously raised from the waxed paper, the 
writing can be seen on the surface of the latter. The Pad 
provides not only a receptive surface that can be used 
over and over again, but also permanent traces of what 
has been written. The ‘Mystic writing pad’ is used as a 
concrete representation of Freud’s views on the func- 
tioning of the perceptual apparatus of the mind. The 
unusual capacity of the mental apparatus to contain an 
unlimited receptive capacity for new perceptions and 
nevertheless lay down permanent memory' traces is 
divided between 2 different systems: A perceptual 
conscious system (Pcpt. Cs.) which receives perceptions 
but retains no permanent trace of them, while the per- 
manent traces of the excitations which have been 
received are preserved in ‘mnemonic systems’ lying 
behind the perceptual system. The perceptual apparatus 
consists of 2 layers, an external protective shield against 
stimuli whose task it is to diminish the strength of exci- 
tations coming in, and a surface behind it which receives 
the stimuli, namely the Pcpt Cs. The Pad solves the 
problem of combining the 2 functions (permanent and 
temporary memory) by dividing them between 2 
separate but interrelated component parts or systems. 
The layer which receives the stimuli (Pcpt Cs.) forms no 
permanent traces; the foundations of memory come 
about in other adjoining systems. 

1925H 19/235 
Negation (1925). 

Negation is discussed. The content of a repressed 
image or idea can make its way into consciousness on 
condition that it is negated. Negation ts a way of taking 
cognizance of what is repressed. To affirm or negate ti e 



o 

ERIC 



134 




19231 



19/267 



content of thoughts is the task of the function of intel- 
lectual judgment. The function of judgment is concerned 
in the main with 2 sorts of decisions. It affirms or disaf- 
firms the possession by a thing of a particular attribute; 
and it asserts or disputes that a presentation has an exist- 
ence in reality. Judging is the intellectual action which 
decides the choice of motor action, which puts an end to 
the postponement due to thought and which leads over 
from thinking to acting. Judging is a continuation, along 
the lines of expediency, of the original process by which 
the ego took things into itself or expelled them from 
itself, according to the pleasure principle. 

1925J 19/243 

Some psychical consequences of the anatomical distinc- 
tion between the sexes.(1925). Editor’s note. (1961). 

From early days Freud made complaints of the 
obscurity enveloping the sexual life of women. One 
result of this obscurity was to lead Freud to assume very 
often that the psychology of women could be taken 
simply as analogous to that of men. But in fact over a 
long period, Freud’s interest had not been directed to 
psychology. A number of previous papers make passing 
reference to different aspects of feminine sexual devel- 
opment, but Freud’s new thesis is fully stated for the 
first time in this paper. It is the synthesis of the various 
pieces of knowledge, derived from widely separated 
historical strata of Freud’s work, which gives its impor- 
tance to the present paper. 

1925J 19/248 

Some psychical consequences of die anatomical distinc- 
tion between the sexes (1925). 

Some psychical consequences of the anatomical 
distinction between the sexes are studied. The analyses 
of neurotics should deal thoroughly with the remotest 
period of their childhood, the time of the early efflores- 
cence of sexual life. In boys, the situation of the Oedi- 
pus complex is the first stage that can be recognized 
with certainty. At that stage a child retains the same 
object which he previously cathected with his libido 
during the preceding period while he was being nursed. 
He regards his father as a disturbing rival and would like 
to get rid of him and take his place. The Oedipus atti- 
tude in boys belongs to the phallic phase; its destruction 
is brought about by the fear of castration. The prehis- 
tory of the Oedipus complex in boys includes an identi- 
fication of an affectionate sort with the father and mas- 
turbatory activity. The masturbatory activity makes its 
first appearance spontaneously as an activity of a body 
organ and is brought into relation with the Oedipus 
complex at some later date. Observation of the primal 
scene at this stage and its impact is discussed. In little 
girls the Oedipus complex raises one problem more than 



in boys. In both cases the mother is the original object, 
but girls abandon it and instead take their father as an 
object. The first step in the phallic phase for little girls is 
the discovery of the penis and immediate envy of what 
she considers a superior organ. After a woman has 
become aware of the wound to her narcissism she devel- 
ops a sense of inferiority. Even after penis envy has 
abandoned its true object, it continues to exist: bv an 
easy displacement, it persists in the character trait of 
jealousy. In boys, the Oedipus complex is destroyed by 
the castration complex; in girls, it is made possible and 
led up to by the castration complex. Other consequences 
of penis envy are a loosening of the girl’s relation with 
her mother as a love object and discovery of the infe- 
riority of the clitoris. The intense current of feeling 
against masturbation appearing in girls is discussed in 
relation to her narcissistic sense of humiliation which is 
bound up with penis envy— that she cannot compete 
with boys and should give up. Thus her recognition of 
the anatomical distinction between the sexes forces her 
away from masculinity to the development of femi- 
ninity. Further views are presented on the difference in 
the Oedipus complex of boys and girls. 

1923F 19/261 

Josef Popper-Lynkeus and the theory of dreams (1923). 

The essential part of Freud’s theory of dreams, the 
dream censorship, was discovered independently by 
Josef Popper-Lynkeus. Freud started out from the 
strange, confused, and senseless character of so many 
dreams, and hit upon the notion that dreams were 
bound to become like that because something was strug- 
gling for expression in them which was opposed by a 
resistance from other mental forces. In dreams hidden 
impulses were stirring which stood in contradiction to 
what might, be called the dreamer’s official ethical and 
esthetic creed. To the mental force in human beings 
which keeps watch on the internal contradictions and 
distorts the dream’s primitive instinctual impulses in 
favor of conventional or of higher moral standards, 
Freud gave the name of dream censorship. What enabled 
Freud to discover the cause of dream distortion was his 
moral courage. In the case of Popper, it was the purity, 
love of truth and moral serenity of his nature. 

19231 19/267 

Dr. Sandor Ferenczi (on his 50th birthday) (1923). 

Dr. Sandor Ferenczi was discussed on his fiftieth 
birthday. Ferenczi has repeatedly played a part in the 
affairs of psychoanalysis. He was born in 1873 ar.d has 
been the leader of the Budapest Psychoanalytical 
Society for 10 years. Ferenczi, as a middle child in a 
large family, had to struggle with a powerful brother 
complex and under the influence of analysis, became an 



135 

. 144 



455-582 0 - 72-10 



1925F 19/273 



irreproachable elder brother, a kindly teacher and pro- 
moter of young ta'ent. Ferenczi’s analytic writings have 
become universally known and appreciated. Ferenczi’s 
scientific achievement is impressive above all from its 
many-sidedness. Besides well-chosen case histories and 
acutely observed clinical communications, we find 
exemplary critical writings, as well as effective polemical 
writings. But besides all these, there are the papers upon 
which Ferenczi’s fame principally rests, in which his 
originality, his wealth of ideas and his command over a 
well-directed scientific imagination find such happy 
expression, and with which he has enlarged the discovery 
of fundamental situations in mental life: ‘Introjection 
and Transference’, including a discussion of the theory 
of hypnosis; ‘Stages in the Development of the Sense of 
Reality’; and his discussion of symbolism. 

1925F 19/273 

Preface to Aichhorn’s ‘Wayward Youth’ (1925). 

The preface to Aichhom’s Wayward Youth is pre- 
sented. None of the applications of psychoanalysis has 
excited so much interest and aroused so many hopes, 
and none, consequently, has attracted so many capable 
workers, as its use in the theory and practice of educa- 
tion. The volume by August Aichhom is concerned with 
one department of the great problem, with the educa- 
tional influencing of juvenile delinquents. The author 
had worked for many years in an official capacity as a 
director of municipal institutions for delinquents before 
he became acquainted with psychoanalysis. Two lessons 
may be derived from the experience and the success of 
August Aichhom. One is that every such person should 
receive a psychoanalytic training, since without it, child- 
ren must remain an inaccessible problem. The second 
lesson is that the work of education is not to be con- 
fused with psychoanalytic influence and cannot be re- 
placed by it. 

1925G 19/279 
Josef Breuer (1925). 

On June 20, 1925, Josef Breuer died in Vienna in his 
eighty-fourth year. He was the creator of the cathartic 
method, and his name is for that reason indissolubly 
linked with the beginnings of psychoanalysis. Breuer was 
a physician. It was in 1880 that chance brought into his 
hands an unusual patient, a girl of more than ordinary 
intelligence who had fallen ill of severe hysteria while 
she was nursing her sick father. It was only 14 years 
later, in the joint publication of Studies on Hysteria that 
the world learned the nature of the treatment of this 
celebrated first case. Freud’s share in the Studies lay 
chiefly in reviving in Breuer an interest which seemed to 
have become extinct, and in then urging him on to publi- 
cation. A kind of reserve which was characteristic of 
him, an inner modesty, surprising in a man of such a 



brilliant personality, had led him to keep his astonishing 
discovery secret for so long. A purely emotional factor 
had given him an aversion to further work on the eluci- 
dation of the neuroses. He had come up against some- 
thing that is never absent, his patient’s transference on 
to her physician, and he had not grasped the impersonal 
nature of the process. Besides the case history of his first 
patient Breuer contributed a theoretical paper in the 
Studies which is far from being out of date. 



1922E 19/283 

Preface to Raymond De Saussure’s ‘the psycho-analytic 
method’ (1922). 

The preface to Raymond de Saussure’s The Psycho- 
analytic Method is presented. Dr. de Saussure has con- 
scientiously studied Freud’s writings and in addition he 
has made the sacrifice of coming to Freud to undergo an 
analysis lasting several months. This has put him in a 
position to form his own judgment on the majority of 
those questions in psychoanalysis which are still unde- 
cided, and to avoid the many distortions and errors 
which one is accustomed to finding in French as well as 
in German expositions of psychoanalysis. The excellent 
dream which Dr. Odier has put at the author’s disposal 
may give even the uninitiated an idea of the wealth of 
dream associations and of the relation between the mani- 
fest dream image and the latent thoughts concealed 
behind it. Today psychoanalysis is beginning to arouse in 
a larger measure the interest of professional men and of 
the lay public in France as well. 



1923G 19/285 

Preface to Max Eitingon’s ‘report on the Berlin psycho- 
analytical policlinic’ (1923). 

The preface to Max Eitingon’s Report on the Berlin 
Psychoanalytical Policlinic is presented. If psychoanaly- 
sis has a value as a therapeutic procedure, if it is capable 
of giving help to sufferers in their struggle to fulfill the 
demands of civilization, this help should be accessible to 
the great multitude who are too poor themselves to pay 
an analyst for his laborious work. This seems to be a 
social necessity particularly in our times, when the intel- 
lectual strata of the population, which are especially 
prone to neurosis, are sinking irresistibly into poverty. 
Institutes such as the Berlin Policlinic make possible the 
education of a considerable number of trained analysts, 
whose activity must be regarded as the sole possible 
protection against injury to patients by ignorant and 
unqualified persons, whether they are laymen or doc- 
tors. 



0 



i 3 45 



1925D 20/7 



1924G 19/286 

Letter to Fritz Wittels (1924). 

A letter to Fritz Wittels, who had written a biography 
of Freud, is presented. Freud neither expected nor 
desired the publication of a biography of himself. In 
some respects, Freud thinks there are positive distortions 
in the work, and he believes that these are the outcome 
of a preconceived notion on the part of the author. Wit* 
tels inferred that Freud has often been compelled to 
make detours when following his own path. Freud 
acknowledged this. Freud also has no use for other peo* 
pie’s ideas when they are presented to him in an inop- 
portune moment. A list of suggested emendations is 
enclosed by Freud. These are based on trustworthy data, 
and are quite independent of his own prepossessions. 
Some of them relate to matters of trifling importance, 
but some of them may cause the author to modify cer- 
tain inferences. 

1923H 19/289 

Letter to Senor Luis Lopez-Ballesteros y de Torres 
(1923). 

A letter to Senor Luis Lopez-Ballesteros y de Torres, 
the Spanish translator of Freud’s work, is presented. 
Freud is able to read in Spanish because of his youthful 
desire to read Don Quixote in the original of Cervantes. 
Because of his ability to read Spanish, he is able to test 
the accuracy of the Spanish version of his works, the 
reading of which invariably provokes a lively apprecia- 
tion of the correct interpretation of his thoughts. 

1924 A 19/290 

Letter to ‘Le Disque Vert’ (1924). 

In a letter to Le Disque Vert, a French periodical, 
Freud states that 2 of Charcot’s lessons left him with a 
deep impression. One was that a person should never tire 
of considering the same phenomena again and again (or 
of submitting to their effects). The other was that a 
person should not mind meeting with contradiction on 
every side provided one has worked sincerely. 

192SB 19/291 

Letter to the editor of the ‘Jewish press centre in Zurich’ 
(1925). 

In a letter to the editor of the Jewish Press Center in 
Zurich, Freud states that he stands apart from the Jew- 
ish religion, as from all other religions. They are of great 
significance as a subject of scientific interest, but he has 
no part in them emotionally. On the other hand, he has 
always had a strong feeling of solidarity with his fellow 
people, and has always encouraged it in his children as 
well. lie has always regretted that his education in He- 
brew was lacking. 



1925C 19/292 

On the occasion of the opening of the Hebrew university 
(1925). 

Although Freud was unable to attend the opening of 
the Hebrew University, he wrote a message concerning 
this occasion. He states that a University is a place in 
which knowledge is taught above all differences of reli- 
gions and of nations, where investigation is carried on, 
which is to show mankind how far they understand the 
world around them and how far they can control it. The 
opening of this university is a noble witness to the de- 
velopment of the Jewish people who have endured 2,000 
years of persecution. 

1924H 19/293 

Editorial changes in the ‘Zeitschrift’ (1924). 

Editorial changes in the Zeitschrift are discussed. Dr. 
Otto Rank has acted as editor of this journal ever since 
its foundation in 1913. Dr. Rank’s place will be taken by 
Dr. S. Rado of Berlin. Dr. Rado will be supported by Dr. 
M. Eitingon and Dr. S. Ferenczi as advisors and collabo- 
rators. At Easter, 1924, Dr. Rank accepted an invitation 
which took him to New York. On his return home he 
announced that he had decided to transfer his activity as 
a teaching and practicing analyst to America, at least for 
a part of the year. This was the reason for the change in 
editor. 

VOL. XX An Autobiographical Study, 
Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, Lay 
Analysis and Other Works (1925-1926) 

1925D 20/3 

An autobiographical study (1925). Editor’s note. 
(1959). 

The English translation of the Autobiographical 
Study, when it was first published in America in 1927, 
was included in the same volume as Freud’s discussion of 
lay analysis. This work is commonly, and quite mis- 
leadingly, referred to as Freud’s ‘Autobiography . The 
aim of its editors was to present an account of the recent 
history of medical science from the pens of those who 
had played a chief part in making it. Freud’s study is 
essentially an account of his personal share in the 
development of psychoanalysis. Those who wish for the 
story of his personal life must be referred to the 3 
volumes of Ernest Jones’s biography. 

1925D 20/7 

An autobiographical study (1925). Part I. Pie-analytic 
period. 

Freud was born on May 6, 1856, at Freiberg in 
Moravia, Czechoslovakia. His parents were Jews, and he 



137 



146 



1925D 20/19 



remained a Jew. He came to Vienna at the age of 4 and 
went through Iris education there. Freud went to the 
University. His turning point came in 1882, when his 
teacher advised him to abandon his theoretical career. 
Freud left the physiological laboratory and entered the 
General Hospital as a Clinical Assistant. He became an 
active worker in the Institute of Cerebral Anatomy. He 
began to study nervous diseases. In the spring of 1885, 
he was appointed Lecturer in Neuropathology on the 
ground of his histological and clinical publications. He 
became a student at the Salpetriere. What impressed 
Freud most of all while he was with Charcot were his 
latest investigations upon hysteria. He had proved the 
genuineness of hysterical phenomena and their con- 
formity to laws, the frequent occurrence of hysteria in 
men, and the production of hysterical paralyses and 
contractures by hypnotic suggestion. His therapeutic 
arsenal contained only 2 weapons, electrotherapy and 
hypnotism. During the period from 1886 to 1891, Freud 
did little scientific work. 

1925D 20/19 

An autobiographical study (1925). Part II. Hypnosis, 
hysteria, actual neuroses. 

Freud used hypnosis for questioning the patient upon 
the origin of his symptom, which in his waking state he 
could often describe only very imperfectly or not at all. 
While Freud was working in Brucke’s laboratory, he 
made the acquaintance of Dr. Josef Breuer. Breuer told 
Freud about a case of hysteria which, between 1880 and 
1882, he had treated in a manner which enabled him to 
penetrate into the causation and significance of hysteri- 
cal symptoms. Breuer spoke of the method as cathartic; 
its therapeutic aim was explained as being to provide 
that the quota of affect used for maintaining the 
symptom, which had got on to the wrong lines and had, 
as it were, become strangulated there, should be directed 
on to the normal path along which it could obtain 
discharge (or abreaction). The stage of development 
which followed was the transition from catharsis to 
psychoanalysis proper. Freud regarded the neuroses as 
being, without exception, disturbances of the sexual 
function, the so-called actual neuroses being the direct 
toxic expression of such disturbances, and the psycho- 
neuroses, their mental expression. Freud altered the 
technique of catharsis. He abandoned hypnotism and 
sought to replace it by some other method after grasping 
the mysterious element that was at work behind 
hypnotism when a patient, with whom he obtained 
excellent results, threw her arms around his neck after 
awaking from a trance. However, he retained the 
practice of requiring the patient to lie upon a sofa while 
Freud sat behind him, seeing the patient but not being 
seen. 



1925D 20/29 

An autobiographical study (1925). Part III. Basic 
theories of psychoanalysis. 

When Freud was set free from hypnotism, the work 
of catharsis took on a new complexion. Everything that 
had been forgotten had in some way or other been 
distressing. In order to make it conscious again, it was 
necessary to make efforts on one’s own part so as to 
urge and compel him to remember. The expenditure of 
force on the part of <'\e physician was the measure of a 
resistance on the part of the patient. The ego drew back 
on its first collision with the objectionable instinctual 
impulse; it debarred the impulse from access to con- 
sciousness and to direct motor discharge, but at the same 
time the impulse retained its full cathexis of energy. This 
process is called repression.. The theory of repression 
became the cornerstone of the understanding of the 
neuroses. Psychoanalysis separates the unconscious into 
a preconscious and an unconscious proper. The investiga- 
tion of the precipitating and underlying causes of the 
neuroses led Freud to conflicts between the subject’s 
sexual impulses and his resistances to sexuality. He was 
carried further and further back into the patient’s life 
and ended by reaching the first years of his childhood. 
Freud discovered that the seduction scenes reported by 
his patients so regularly as having happened in childhood 
were really wishful fantasies. He was thereby led to the 
conclusion that neurotic symptoms (compromise forma- 
tions between the regressed impulse striving for satis- 
faction and the resistance of the ego opposed to it) were 
not related to actual events but to wishful fantasies. The 
sexual function is in existence from the very beginning 
of the individual’s life, though at first it is attached to 
the other vital functions and does not become indepen- 
dent of them until later. Sexual energy is called libido. It 
does not pass through its prescribed course of develop- 
ment smoothly and can become fixated at various points 
as a result. The various stages of object relationship are 
chronologically described (autoerotic, oedipal) and the 
diphasic nature of sexual growth is discussed. 

1925D 20/40 

An autobiographical study (1925). Part IV. Technique 
of psychoanalysis. 

The theories of resistance and of repression, of the 
unconscious, of the etiological significance of sexual life 
and of the importance of infantile experiences form the 
principal constituents of the theoretical structure of 
psychoanalysis. Froud asked his patient to abandon 
himself to a process of free association. The factor of 
transference was discovered. An intense emotional rela- 
tionship develops between the patient and the analyst 
which cannot be accounted for by the actual situation. 
It can be positive (to the extreme of unbridled love) or 



138 




447 



o 





1935 A 20/71 



negative (to the extreme of hatred). Transference is the 
mainspring of the joint work of analysis. It can become a 
major resistance. Analysis without transference is an 
impossibility. With the help of the method of free 
association and of the related art of interpretation, 
psychoanalysis succeeded in proving that dreams have a 
meaning. The latent dream thoughts contain the 
meaning of the dream, while its m?.nifest content is 
simply a make believe, which can serve as a starting 
point for the associations but not for the interpretation. 
The unconscious impulse makes use of the nocturnal 
relaxation of repression in order to push its way into 
consciousness with the dream. But the repressive re- 
sistance of the ego is not abolished in sleep but merely 
reduced. Some of it remains in the shape of a censorship 
of dreams and forbids the unconscious impulse to 
express itself as the fulfillment of a repressed wish. 
Dreams have access to the forgotten material of child- 
hood, and so it happens that infantile amnesia is for the 
most part overcome in connection with the interpreta- 
tion of dreams. In the same way that psychoanalysis 
makes use of dream interpretation, it also profits by the 
study of the numerous little slips and mistakes which 
people make, symptomatic actions, as they are cailed. 

1925D 20/48 

An autobiographical study (1925). Part V. Collabora- 
tors, defectors and new instinct theory. 

For more than 10 years after his separation from 
Breuer, Freud had no followers. The main obstacle to 
agreement lay in the fact that Freud’s opponents 
regarded psychoanalysis as a product of his speculative 
imagination and were unwilling to believe in the long, 
patient and unbiased work which had gone to its 
making. The result of the official anathema against 
psychoanalysis was that the analysts began to come 
closer together. Official disapproval could not hinder the 
spread of psychoanalysis either in Germany or in other 
countries. If ihe preliminary cathartic period is left on 
one side, the history of psychoanalysis falls, from 
Freud’s point of view, into 2 phases. In the first of these, 
he stood alone and had to do all the work himself: this 
was from 1895 until 1906 or 1907. In the second phase, 
the contributions of his pupils and collaborators were 
growing more and more in importance. Increasing 
experience showed more and more plainly that the 
Oedipus complex was the nucleus of the neurosis. In the 
Oedipus complex, the libido was seen to be attached to 
the image of the parental figures. The picture which life 
presents to us is the result of the concurrent and 
mutually opposing action of Eros and the death of 
instinct. The neuroses were the first subject of analysis. 
However, Freud was able, very early (1896) to establish 
in a case of paranoid dementia the presence of the same 
etiological factors and the same emotional complexes as 



in the neuroses. Freud also discussed the concept of 
narcissism. This was a state where the subject’s libido 
filled his own ego and had that for its object. Narcissism 
developed at an earlier period than the Oedipus com- 
plex. Narcissistic libido was part of the ego instincts 
(those of self-preservation) as opposed to the libidinal 
instincts. This was later replaced by the contract 
between narcissistic libido and object libido. He also 
postulated a death instinct as opposed to liros (self-pre- 
servative instincts). In his latest speculative work (The 
Ego and The Id) Freud outlined the structural aspect of 
the mental apparatus by describing the id, ego and 
superego. 

1925D 20/62 

An autobiographical study (1925). Part VI. History of 
applied analysis. 

From the time of the writing of The Interpretation of 
Dreams , psychoanalysis ceased to be a purely medical 
subject. Between its appearance in Germany and in 
France, lies the history of its numerous applications to 
departments of literature and of esthetics, to the history 
of religions and to prehistory, to mythology, to folklore, 
to education, and so on. A number of suggestions came 
to Freud out of the Oedipus complex, the ubiquity of 
which gradually dawned on him. From understanding 
the Oedipus tragedy of destiny, it was only a step 
further to understanding a tragedy of character, Hamlet. 
It could scarcely be a chance that this neurotic creation 
of the poet should have come to grief, like his 
numberless fellows in the real world, over the Oedipus 
complex. Freud set a high value on his contributions to 
the psychology of religion, which began with the 
establishment of a remarkable similarity between ob- 
sessive actions and religious practices or ritual. The 
obsessional neurosis is described as a distorted private 
religion and religion as a kind of universal obsessional 
iieurosis; It is only a step from the phantasies of 
individual neurotics to the imaginative creations of 
groups and peoples as we find them in myths, legends, 
and fairy tales. 

1935A 20/71 

An autobiographical study (1925). Postscript. (1935). 

An Autobiographical Study first appeared in America 
in 1927. Two themes run through these pages: the story 
of Freud’s life and the history of psychoanalysis. They 
are intimately interwoven. An Autobiographical Study 
shows how psychoanalysis came to be the whole content 
of Freud’s life and assumes that no personal experiences 
of his are of any interest in comparison to his relations 
with that science. At the end of his life Freud returned 
to the investigation of interests that held his attention as 
a youth, that of culture. There can no longer be any 
doubt that psychoanalysis will continue; it has proved its 



o 

ERLC 



148 



139 



1926D 20/77 



capacity to survive and to develop both as a branch of 
knowledge and as a therapeutic method. The number of 
its supporters has considerably increased. Some support- 
ers lay most stress upon clarifying and deepening our 
knowledge of psychology, while others are concerned 
with keeping in contact with medicine and psychiatry. 
From the practical point of view, some analysts have set 
themselves the task of bringing about the recognition of 
psychoanalysis at the universities and its inclusion in the 
medical curriculum, whereas others are content to 
remain outside these institutions and will not allow that 
psychoanalysis is less important in the field of education 
than in that of medicine. 

1926D 20/77 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Editor’s 
introduction. (1959). 

Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety was written in 
July, 1925, was revised in December of the same year, 
and published in the third week of the following 
February. The topics with which it deals range over a 
wide field, and there are signs that Freud found an 
unusual difficulty in unifying the work. In spite of such 
important side issues as the different classes of resist- 
ance, the distinction between repression and defense, 
and the relations h ' ,en anxiety, pain and mourning, 
the problem of anxiety is its main theme. The problem 
of anxiety includes the following aspects: anxiety as 
transformed libido; realistic and neurotic anxiety; the 
traumatic situation and situations of danger; anxiety as a 
signal; and anxiety and birth. The book by Rank, 
Trauma of Birth, prescribed ideas which focussed on the 
trauma of birth giving it the central role in all neuroses, 
and giving it greater importance than the Oedipus 
complex. It was the primal anxiety from which all later 
anxiety sprang. Freud repudiated this idea. However, his 
consideration of Rank’s notions of anxiety led him to 
reconsider his own and Inhibitions, Symptoms and 
Anxiety was the result. 

1926D 20/87 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part I. 
Inhibitions reflect restrictions of ego functions. 

The 2 concepts of inhibitions and symptoms are not 
upon the same plane. Inhibition does not necessarily 
have a pathological implication. A symptom actually 
denotes the presence of some pathological process. The 
sexual function is liable to a great number of dis- 
turbances which can be classed as simple inhibitions. 
Disturbances of the sexual function are brought about 
by a great variety of means: 1) the libido may simply be 
turned away; 2) the function may be less well carried 
out; 3) it may be hampered by having conditions 
attached to it, or modified by being diverted to other 



aims; 4) it may be prevented by security measures; 5) if 
it cannot be prevented from starting, it may be 
immediately interrupted by the appearance of anxiety; 
and 6) if it is nevertheless carried out, there may be a 
subsequent reaction of protest against it and an attempt 
to undo what has been done. The function of nutrition 
is most frequently disturbed by a disinclination to eat, 
brought about by a withdrawal of libido. In some 
neurotic conditions, locomotion is inhibited by a dis- 
inclination to walk or a weakness in walking. In 
inhibition in work, the subject feels a decrease in his 
pleasure in it or becomes less able to do it well. 
Inhibitions are described as resistances of the functions 
of the ego which have been either imposed as a measure 
of precaution or brought about as a result of an 
impoverishment of energy. Inhibitions are undertaken 
by the ego in order to avoid coming into conflict with 
the id or with the superego. 



1926D 20/91 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part II. 
Symptoms reflect intersystemic conflicts. 

A symptom is a sign of, and a substitute for, an 
instinctual satisfaction which has remained in abeyance; 
it is a consequence of the process of repression. 
Repression proceeds from the ego when the latter 
refuses to associate itself with an instinctual cathexis 
which has been aroused in the id. The ego is able, by 
means of repression, to keep the idea which is the 
vehicle of the reprehensible impulse from becoming 
conscious. The ego is the seat of anxiety. In order for 
the ego to oppose an instinctual process in the id it has 
only to give a signal of unpleasure in order to enlist the 
aid of the pleasure principle in overpowering the id. The 
ego also obtains its influence in virtue of its intimate 
connections with the phenomenon of consciousness. The 
ego wards off internal and external dangers alike along 
identical lines. Just as the ego controls the path to action 
in regard to the external world, so it controls access to 
consciousness. In repression, it exercises its power in 
both directions, acting in the one manner upon the 
instinctual impulse itself and in the other upon the 
psychical representative of that impulse. Most regres- 
sions dealt with in therapeutic work are cases of 
after-pressure. A symptom arises from an instinctual 
impulse detrimentally affected by regression. The im- 
pulse finds expression through a substitute which is 
seduced, displaced, and inhibited. Freud showed that the 
ego can exert control over the id as well as be dependent 
on it. Tire same applied to the superego. He warned 
against making a “Weltanschauung” out of any one 
statement since conceptions in analysis are always open 
to revision. 



I. 



1926D 20/97 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part III. 
Relation of ego to the id and to symptoms. 

The ego is the organized portion of the id. As a rule, 
the instinctual impulse which is to be repressed remains 
isolated. The initial act of repression is followed by a 
tedious or interminable sequel in which the struggle 
against the instinctual impulse is prolonged into a 
struggle against the symptom. In this secondary defen* 
sive struggle the ego presents 2 faces with contradictory 
expressions. One line of behavior, it adopts, springs from 
the fact that its very nature obliges it to make what must 
be regarded as an attempt at restoration or reconcilia- 
tion. The presence of a symptom may entail a certain 
impairment of capacity, and this can be exploited to 
appease some demand on the part of the superego or to 
refuse some claim from the external world. In this way 
the symptom gradually comes to be the rept tentative of 
important interests. In obsessional neurosis and paranoia 
the forms which the symptoms assume become very 
valuable to the ego because they obtain for it, not 
certain advantages, but a narcissistic satisfaction which it 
would otherwise be without. All of this results in the 
secondary gain from illness which follows a neurosis. 
The second line of behavior adopted by the ego is less 
friendly in character, since it continues in the direction 
of repression. 

1926D 20/101 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part IV. 
Anxiety produces repression. 

An infantile hysterical phobia of animals, Little 
Hans’s phobia of horses, is presented. Little Hans refused 
to go out into the street because he was afraid that a 
horse would bite him. He was in the jealous and hostile 
Oedipus attitude towards his father, whom nevertheless 
he dearly loved. Here is a conflict due to ambivalence: a 
well-grounded love and a no less justifiable hatred 
directed towards one and the same person. Little Hans’s' 
phobia must have been an attempt to solve this conflict. 
The instinctual impulse which underwent repression in 
Little Hans was a hostile one against his father. Little 
Hans alleged that what he was afraid of was that a horse 
would bite him. The idea of being devoured by the 
father is typical age-old childhood material. It has the 
familiar parallels in mythology and in the animal 
kingdom. Two instinctual impulses have been overtaken 
by repression, sadistic aggressiveness towards the father 
and a tender passive attitude to him. The formation of 
his phobia had had the effect of abolishing his affection- 
ate object cathexis of his mother as well. The motive 
force of the repression was the fear of impending 
castration. His fear that a horse would bite him can be 
given the full sense of a fear that a horse would bite off 



1926D 20/111 

his genitals, would castrate him. A comparison of the 
phobias presented by Wolf Man and that of Little Hans 
showed that, although there were marked differences in 
their histories, the outcome was the same. This was 
explained by examining the anxiety of the 2 patients. 
Anxiety was seen as response to fear of castration either 
seen as real or impending. It was this anxiety, occurring 
in the ego, which set the process of regression into 
motion which ultimately led to the phobia formation. 
Anxiety now had 2 sources: one from the id (disturbed 
libido), and the other from the ego. 

1926D 20/111 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part V. 
Defences other than repression. 

Conversion hysteria exhibits no anxiety whatever. 
The formation of symptoms in conversion hysteria is 
obscure. It presents a manifold and varied picture with 
no uniform explanation available. The more common 
symptoms of conversion hysteria are motor paralyses, 
contractures, involuntary actions or discharges, pains, 
and hallucinations. They are cathectic processes which 
are either permanently maintained or intermittent. The 
symptoms belonging to the obsessional neuroses fall into 
2 groups, each having an opposite trend. They are either 
prohibitions, precautions, and expiations or they are 
substitutive satisfactions which often appear in symbolic 
disguise. In enforcing regression, the ego scores its first 
success in its defensive struggle against the demands of 
the libido. It is perhaps in obsessional cases more than in 
normal or hysterical ones that the motive force of 
defense is the castration complex and that what is being 
fended off are the trends of the Oedipus complex. The 
reaction formations in the ego of the obsessional 
neurotic should be regarded as yet another mechanism 
of defense. Other defense mechanisms alluded to in this 
condition are: undoing, regression, isolation. Ambiva- 
lence is also described as contributing greatly to the 
formation of obsessional neurosis for some unknown 
reason. The chief task during the latency period seems to 
be the fending off of the temptation to masturbate. This 
struggle produces a series of symptoms which appear in a 
typical fashion in the most different individuals and 
which in general have the character of a ceremonial. The 
advent of puberty opens a decisive chapter in the history 
of an obsessional neurosis. The overstrict superego insists 
on the suppression of sexuality. In obsessional neurosis, 
the conflict is aggravated in 2 directions: the defensive 
forces become more intolerant and the forces that are to 
be fended off become more intolerable. Both effects are 
due to regression of the libido. Obsessional states which 
have no guilt attached are mentioned. These seem more 
closely related to the satisfaction of masochistic im- 
pulses. 



ISO 



141 



1926D 20/119 



1926D 20/119 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part VI. 
Undoing and isolation. 

There are 2 activities of the ego which form symp- 
toms and which deserve special attention because they 
are surrogates of repression. The 2 activities are undoing 
what has been done and isolating. The first of these has a 
wide range of application. It is, as it were, negative 
magic, and endeavors, by means of motor symbolism, to 
blow away not merely the consequences of some event 
but the event itself. In obsessional neurosis the techni- 
que of undoing what has been done is first met within 
die diphasic symptoms in which one action is cancelled 
out by a second, so that it is as though neither action 
had taken phce. This aim of undoing is the second 
underlying motive of obsessional ceremonials, the first 
being to take the rational precautions in order to prevent 
the occurrence or recurrence of some particular event. 
The second technique, isolating, is peculiar to obsessio- 
nal neurosis. When something unpleasant has happened 
to the subject, or when he himself has done something 
which has a significance for his neurosis, he interpolates 
an interval during which nothing further must happen. It 
is especially difficult for an obsessional neurotic to carry 
out the fundamental rule of psychoanalysis. His ego is 
more watchful and makes sharper isolations, probably 
because of the high degree of tension due to conflict 
that exists between his superego and his id. In endeavo- 
ring to prevent associations and connections of thought, 
the ego is obeying one of the oldest and most fundamen- 
tal commands of obsessional neurosis, the taboo on 
touching. The avoidance of touching is of paramount 
importance in this illness because it is the immediate aim 
of the aggressive as well as the loving object cathexes. 

1926D 20/124 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part VII. 
Anxiety is a signal of dangerous separation. 

In animal phobias, the ego has to oppose a libidinal 
object cathexis coming from the id. a cathexis that 
belongs either to the positive or negative Oedipus 
complex, because it believes that to give way to it would 
entail the danger of castration. The aggressive impulse 
flows mainly from the destructive instinct. As soon as 
the ego recognizes the danger of castration, it gives the 
signal of anxiety and inhibits, through the pleasure-un- 
pleasure agency, the impending cathectic process in the 
id. At the same time the phobia is formed. Now the 
castration anxiety is directed to a different object and 
expressed in a distorted form, so that the patient is 
afraid, not of being castrated by his father, but of being 
bitten by a horse or devoured by a wolf. Phobias have 
the character of a projection in that they replace an 
internal, instinctual danger by an external, perceptual 

142 



one. The anxiety felt in animal phobias is an affective 
reaction on the part of the ego to danger; and the danger 
which is being signalled in this way is the danger of 
castration. A phobia generally sets in aft< r a first anxiety 
attack has been experienced in specifi ; circumstances, 
such as in the street or in a train or in solitude. Anxiety 
is a reaction to a situation of danger. It is obviated by 
the ego’s doing something tp avoid that situation or to 
withdraw from it. Symptoms are then viewed as created 
so as to avoid a danger situation whose presence was 
signalled by the generation of anxiety. The narcissistic 
neuroses are explained in terms of a sexual factor being 
present, namely narcissism, which emphasizes the libidi- 
nal nature of the instinct of self-preservation. Since the 
unconscious can not conceive of its annihilation, and 
since the unconscious must contribute something to the 
formation of the narcissistic neuroses, then the fear of 
death must be analogous to the fear of castration. The 
ego responds to being abandoned by the protecting 
superego, the powers of destiny. Also, the protective 
shield against excessive amounts of external excitation is 
broken. 

1926D 20/132 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part VII. 
Anxiety reproduces feelings of helplessness. 

Anxiety is an affective state. Analysis of anxiety 
states reveals the existence of: 1) a specific character of 
unpleasure, 2) acts of discharge, and 3) perceptions of 
those acts. Anxiety states are regarded as a reproduction 
of the trauma of birth. Anxiety arose originally as a 
reaction to a state of danger. It is reproduced whenever 
the danger stage recurs. Only a few of the manifestations 
of anxiety in children are comprehensible to us. They 
occur, for instance, when a child is alone, or in the dark 
or when it finds itself with an unknown person instead 
of one to whom it is used. These 3 instances can be 
reduced to a single condition, namely, that of missing 
.someone who is loved and longed for. The child’s 
mnemQnic image of the person longed for is no doubt 
intensely cathected, probably in a hallucinatory way at 
first. But this has no effect; and now it seems as though 
the longing turns into anxiety. Economic disturbance 
caused by an accumulation of amounts of stimulation 
which need disposal is the real essence of the “danger”. 
The nonsatisfaccion of a growing tension due to need 
against which the infant wants to be safeguarded repeats 
the danger situation of being born. From this point 
anxiety undergoes various transformations parallel to the 
various stages of libidinal development. The significance 
of the loss of object as a determinant of anxiety extends 
for a long period of time. The castration anxiety, 
belonging to the phallic phase, is also a fear of separation 
and is thus attached to the same determinant. In this 
case the danger is of being separated from one’s genitals. 



1926D 20/157 



The next transformation is caused by the power of the 
superego. Castration anxiety develops into moral anx- 
iety. Loss of love plays much the same part in hysteria 
as the threat of castration does in phobias and fear of 
the superego in obsessional neurosis. The present con- 
ception of anxiety is that of a signal given by the ego in 
order to affect the pleasure-unpleasure agency. There is 
no anxiety of the superego or id. The id only can be the 
site of processes which cause the ego to produce anxiety. 

1926D 20/144 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part IX. 
Relation between symptom formation and anxiety. 

The relationship between the formation of symptoms 
and the generating of anxiety is considered. There are 2 
very widely held opinions on this subject. One is that 
anxiety is itself a symptom of neurosis. The other is that 
there is a much more intimate relation between the 2. 
According to the second opinion, symptoms are only 
formed in order to avoid anxiety. Symptoms are 
created in order to remove the ego from a situation of 
danger. If the symptoms are prevented from being 
formed, the danger does in fact materialize. Symptom 
formation puts an end to the danger situation. The 
defensive process is analogous to the flight by means of 
which the ego removes itself from a danger that 
threatens it from outside. The defensive process is an 
attempt at flight from an instinctual danger. The study 
of the determinants of anxiety shows the defensive 
behavior of the ego transfigured in a rational light. Each 
danger situation corresponds to a particular period of 
life or developmental phase of the mental apparatus and 
is justifiable for it. A great many people remain infantile 
in their behavior in regard to danger and do not 
overcome determinants of anxiety which have grown out 
of date. Signs of childhood neuroses can be detected in 
all adult neurotics; however, all children who show those 
signs do not become neurotic in later life. It must be, 
therefore, that certain determinants of anxiety are 
relinquished and certain danger situations lose their 
significance as the individual becomes more mature. 
Moreover, some of these danger situations manage to 
survive into later times by modifying their determinants 
of anxiety so as to bring them up to date. Other 
determinants of anxiety, such as fear of the superego, 
are destined not to disappear at all. 

1926D 20/150 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part X. 
Repetition is the consequence of repression. 

Anxiety is the reaction to danger. If the ego succeeds 
in protecting itself from a dangerous instinctual impulse 
through the process of repression, it has inhibited and 
damaged the particular part of the id concerned; but it 
has at the same time given it some independence and has 



renounced some of its own sovereignty. Among the 
factors that play a part in the causation of neuroses and 
that have created the conditions under which the forces 
of the mind are pitted against one another, 3 emerge 
into prominence: a biological, a phylogenetic, and a 
purely psychological factor. The biological factor is the 
long period of time during which the young of the 
human species is in a condition of helplessness and 
dependence. The existence of the phylogenetic factor is 
based only upon inference. We have been led to assume 
its existence by a remarkable feature in the development 
of the libido. The sexual life of man does not make a 
steady advance from birth to maturity, but after an early 
efflorescence up to the fifth year, it undergoes a very 
decided interruption; and it then starts on its course 
once more at puberty taking up again the beginnings 
broken off in early childhood. The third, psychological, 
factor resides in a defect of our mental apparatus which 
has to do precisely with its differentiation into an id and 
an ego, and which is therefore also attributable ulti- 
mately to the influence of the external world. The ego 
cannot protect itself from internal instinctual dangers as 
well as it can from reality. It acquiesces in the formation 
of symptoms in exchange for impairing the instinct. 

1926D 20/157 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part XI. 
Addenda: A. Modification of earlier views. 

An important element in the theory of repression is 
the view that repression is not an event that occurs once 
but that it requires a permanent expenditure of energy. 
If this expenditure were to cease, the repressed impulse, 
which is being fed all the time from its sources, would 
on the next occasion, flow along the channels from 
which it had been forced away, and the repression would 
either fail in its purpose or would have to be repeated an 
indefinite number of times. It is because instincts are 
continuous in their nature that the ego has to make its 
defensive action secure by a permanent expenditure. 
This action undertaken to protect repression is observa- 
ble in analytic treatment as resistance. Resistance pre- 
supposes what is called anticathexis. The resistance that 
has to be overcome in analysis proceeds from the ego, 
which clings to its anticathexes. Five types of resistance 
were noted: the ego resistances subdivided into regres- 
sion resistance, transference resistance, and gain from 
illness; the id resistance i.e., the compulsion to repeat; 
the superego resistance, the sense of guilt or the need for 
punishment. The ego is the source of anxiety. Anxiety is 
the general reaction to situations of danger. The term 
defense is employed explicitly as a general designation 
for all the techniques which the ego makes use of in 
conflicts which may lead to a neurosis. Repression is 
retained for a special method of defense. The concept of 
defense covers all the processes that have the same 




143 



1926D 20/164 

purpose, the protection of the ego against instinctual 
demands. Repression is subsumed under it as a special 
case. 

1926D 20/164 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part XI. 
Addenda: B. Supplementary remarks on anxiety. 

Anxiety has an unmistakable relation to expectation: 
it is anxiety about something. It has a quality of 
indeflniteness and lack of object. In precise words we 
use the word fear rather than anxiety if it has found an 
object. There are 2 reactions to real danger. One is an 
affective reaction, an outbreak of anxiety. The other is a 
protective action. A danger situation is a recognized, 
remembered, expected situation of helplessness. Anxiety 
is the original reaction to helplessness in the trauma and 
is reproduced later on in the danger situation as a signal 
for help. The ego, which experienced the trauma 
passively, now repeats it actively in a weakened version, 
in the hope of being able itself to direct its course. There 
seems to be a close connection between anxiety and 
neurosis because the ego defends itself against an 
instinctual danger with the help of the anxiety reaction 
just as it does against an external real danger; however, 
this line of defensive activity eventuates in a neurosis 
owing to an imperfection of the mental apparatus. 

1926D 20/169 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Part XI. 
Addenda. C. Anxiety, pain and mourning. 

The situation of the infant’s missing its mother is not 
a danger situation but a traumatic one. It is a traumatic 
situation if the infant happens to be feeling a need which 
its mother should be the one to satisfy. It turns into a 
danger situation if this need is not present at the 
moment. The first determinant of anxiety, which the 
ego itself introduces, is loss of perception of the object. 
Later on, experiences teaches the child that the object 
can be present but angry with it; and then loss of love 
from the object becomes a new and much more enduring 
danger and determinant of anxiety. Pain is the actual 
reaction to loss of an object while anxiety is the reaction 
to the danger which the loss entails. Pain occurs in the 
first instance and as a regular thing whenever a stimulus 
which impinges on the periphery breaks through the 
devices of the protective shield against stimuli and 
proceeds to act like a continuous instinctual stimulus, 
against which muscular action, which is as a rule 
effective because it withdraws the place that is being 
stimulated from the stimulus, is powerless. When there is 
physical pain, a high degree of what may be termed 
narcissistic cathexis of the painful place occurs. This 
cathexis continues to increase and tends to empty the 
ego. The transition from physical to mental pain 
corresponds to a change from narcissistic cathexis to 



object cathexis. Mourning occurs under the influence of 
reality testing; for the latter function demands categori- 
cally from the bereaved person that he should separate 
himself from the object, since it no longer exists. 
Mourning is entrusted with the task of carrying out tliis 
retreat from the object in all those situations in which it 
was the recipient of a high degree of cathexis. 

1926D 20/173 

Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926). Appendix A: 
‘Repression’ and ‘defence’. 

Repression and defense are discussed. Both repression 
and defense occurred very freely during Freud’s Breuer 
period. The first appearance of repression was in the 
Preliminary Communication , and of defense in the first 
paper on The Neuropsychoses of Defence. In the Studies 
on Hysteria , repression appeared about a dozen times 
and defense somewhat more often than that. After the 
Breuer period, there was a falling off in the frequency of 
the use of defense. It was not dropped entirely, however. 
But repression was already beginning to predominate 
and was almost exclusively used in the Dora case history 
and the Three Essays. Soon after this, attention was 
explicitly drawn to the change, in a paper on sexuality in 
the neuroses, dated June, 1905. After 1905, the pre- 
dominance of repression increased still more. But it was 
not long before the usefulness of defense as a more 
inclusive term than repression began unobtrusively to 
make its appearance, particularly in the metapsychologi- 
cal papers. Thus, the vicissitudes of the instincts, only 
one of which is repression, were regarded as modes of 
defense against them and projection was spoken of as a 
mechanism or means of defense. 

1926E 20/179 

The question of lay analysis (1926). Conversations with 
an impartial person. Editor’s note. (1959). 

In the late spring of 1926 proceedings were begun in 
Vienna against Theodor Reik, a prominent nonmedical 
member of the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society. He was 
charged, on information laid by someone whom he had 
been treating analytically, with a breach of an old 
Austrian law against quackery, a law which made it 
illegal for a person without a medical degree to treat 
patients. Freud intervened energetically. He argued the 
position privately with an official of high standing, and 
went on to compose the pamphlet, The Question of Lay 
Analysis, for immediate publication. The publication of 
Freud’s booklet brought into the foreground the strong 
differences of opinion on the permissibility of 
nonmedical psychoanalysis which existed within the 
psychoanalytic societies themselves. From early times, 
Freud held the opinion that psychoanalysis was not to 
be regarded as purely a concern of the medical profes- 
sion. 



144 

tS.5'3 




1926E 20/206 



1926E 20/183 

The question of lay analysis (1926). Introduction & 
Parti. 

The question of lay analysis is discussed. Layman is 
equivalent to nondoctor. In Germany and America, 
every patient can have himself treated how and by 
whom he chooses, and anyone who chooses can handle 
any patients. The law does not intervene until it is called 
in to expiate some injury done to the patient. But in 
Austria, there is a preventive law, which forbids non- 
doctors from undertaking the treatment of patients, 
without waiting for its outcome. A patient recognizes 
that he is ill and goes to doctors, by whom people 
expect nervous disorders to be removed. The doctors lay 
down the categories into which these complaints are 
divided. They diagnose them under different names: 
neurasthenia, psychasiitenia, phobias, obsessional neu- 
rosis, hysteria. They examine the organs which produce 
the symptoms and find them healthy. They recommend 
interruptions in the patient’s accustomed mode of life 
and these means bring about temporary improvements, 
or no results at all. Eventually the patients hear that 
there are people who are concerned quite specially with 
the treatment of such complaints and start an analysis 
with them. The analyst and the patient talk to each 
other. We call on the patient to be completely straight- 
forward with his analyst, to keep nothing back intentio- 
nally that comes into his head, and then to put aside 
every reservation that might prevent his reporting certain 
thoughts or memories. 

1926E 20/191 

The question of lay analysis (1926). Part II. 

The question of lay analysis is discussed. We picture 
the unknown apparatus which serves the activities of the 
mind as being really like an instrument constructed of 
several parts, agencies, each of which performs a 
particular function and which have a fixed spatial 
relation to one another. We recognize in human beings a 
mental organization which is interpolated between their 
sensory stimuli and the perception of their somatic 
needs on the one hand and their motor acts on the 
other, and which meditates between them for a particu- 
lar purpose. This organization is called their ego. There is 
another mental region, more extensive, more imposing 
and more obscure than the ego: this is called the id. We 
suppose that the ego is the layer of the mental apparatus 
(of the id) which has been modified by the influence of 
the external world. The ego and the id differ greatly 
from each other in several respects. The rules governing 
the course of mental acts are different in the ego and the 
id; the ego pursues different purposes and by other 
methods. Everything that happens in the id is, and 
remains, unconscious; processes in the ego c$n become 



conscious. But not all of them are, nor always, nor 
necessarily; and large portions of the ego can remain 
permanently unconscious. The ego is the external, 
peripheral layer of the id. We require that everyone who 
wants to practice analysis on other people shall first 
himself submit to an analysis. 

1926E 20/200 

The question of lay analysis (1926). Part III. 

The question of lay analysis is discussed. The bodily 
needs, in so far as they represent an instigation to mental 
activity, are given the name of instincts. These instincts 
fill the id: all the energy in the id originates from them. 
The forces in the ego are derived from those in the id. 
These instincts want satisfaction. If the id’s instinctual 
demands meet with no satisfaction, intolerable con- 
ditions arise. The instincts in the id press for immediate 
satisfaction at all costs, and in that way they achieve 
nothing or even bring about appreciable damage. It is the 
task of the ego to guard against such mishaps, to mediate 
between the claims of the id and the objections of the 
external world. There is no natural opposition between 
ego and id. If the ego experiences an instinctual demand 
from the id which it would like to resist but which it 
cannot control, the ego treats the instinctual danger as if 
it were an external one; it makes an attempt at flight. 
The ego institutes a repression of the instinctual im- 
pulses. The ego has made an attempt to suppress certain 
portions of the id in an inappropriate manner, this 
attempt has failed and the id has taken its revenge in the 
neurosis. A neurosis is the result of a conflict between 
the ego and the id. The therapeutic aim is to restore the 
ego and give it back command over the id. The ego is 
urged to correct the repressions. This involves analyzing 
back to childhood through the patient’s symptoms, 
dreams and free associations. 

1926E 20/206 

The question of lay analysis (1926). Part IV. 

The question of lay analysis is discussed. Analysis is 
founded on complete candor. This obligation to candor 
puts a grave moral responsibility on the analyst as well as 
on the patient. Factors from sexual life play an 
extremely important, a dominating, perhaps even a 
specific part among the causes and precipitating factors 
of neurotic illness. The recognition of sexuality has 
become the strongest motive for people’s hostility to 
analysis. Sexual life is not simply something spicy; it is 
also a serious scientific problem. Analysis has to go back 
into the early years of the patient’s childhood, because 
the decisive repressions have taken place then, while his 
ego was feeble. Sexual instinctual impulses accompany 
life from birth onwards, and it is precisely in order to 
fend off those instincts that the infantile ego institutes 



145 

iS4 



1926E 20/218 



repressions. The sexual function undergoes a compli- 
cated process of development. If obstacles arise later on 
to the exercise of the sexual function, the sexual urge, 
the libido, is apt to hark back to the earlier point, of 
fixation. The diphasic onset of sexual life has a great 
deal to do with the genesis of neurotic illnesses. It seems 
to occur only in human beings, and it is perhaps one of 
the determinants of the human privilege of becoming 
neurotic. The children’s 2 excretory needs are cathected 
with sexual interest. It takes quite a long time for 
children to develop feelings of disgust. Children regularly 
direct their sexual wishes towards their nearest relatives. 
It is the sexual wishes towards the parent of the opposite 
sex with concomitant hostility felt toward the other 
parent which constitutes the basis for the Oedipus 
complex. The revival of this complex in puberty may 
have serious consequences. The child’s first choice of 
the object therefore is an incestous one. The evidence 
for this is supported through the study of history, 
mythology, and anthropology. 

1926E 20/218 

The question of lay analysis (1926). Part V. 

The question of lay analysis is discussed. The analyst 
infers, from what the patient says, the kind of impres- 
sions, experiences and wishes which he has repressed 
because he came across them at a time when his ego was 
still feeble and was afraid of them instead of dealing 
with them. When the patient has learned this, he puts 
himself back in the old situations and manages better. 
The limitations to which his ego was tied then disappear, 
and he is cured. The material has to be interpreted at the 
right moment which is when the patient has come so 
near the repressed material that only a few more stages 
are needed to get to it. !t can be shown that patients 
profess a desire to get well ., but on the other hand do not 
want to get well. This results from the “gain from 
illness.” This represents one of the resistances to 
psychoanalysis. There are 3 other resistances: the sense 
of guilt and need for punishment stemming from the 
superego; the need for the instinctual impulse to find 
satisfaction along a path it has always known, an id 
resistance; repression resistance coming from the ego. 
The emotional relation which the patient adopts towards 
the analysis is of a quite peculiar nature. This emotional 
relation is in the nature of falling in love. This love is of 
a positively compulsive kind. It has taken the place of 
the neurosis. The patient is repeating, in the form of 
falling in love with the analyst, mental experiences 
which he has already been through once before; he has 
transferred on to the analyst mental attitudes that were 
lying ready in him and were intimately connected with 
his neurosis. This transference love, because of its being 
really a pathological love, acts as a resistance to analysis 
(and is thus the fifth major resistance in analysis). He is 



also repeating his old defensive actions. The whole skill 
in handling the transference is devoted to bringing it 
about. There are 2 Institutes at which instruction in 
psychoanalysis is given. Anyone who has passed through 
a course of instruction, who has been analyzed himself, 
who has learned the delicate technique of psychoanalysis 
(the art of interpretation, fighting resistances, handling 
the transference), is no longer a layman in the field of 
psychoanalysis. 

1926E 20/229 

The question of lay analysis (1926). Part VI. 

The question of lay analysis is discussed. It seems as if 
the neuroses are a particular kind of illness and analysis 
is a particular method of treating them, a specialized 
branch of medicine. However, doctors have no historical 
claim to the sole possession of analysis. In his medical 
school, a doctor receives a training which is more or less 
the opposite of what he would need as a preparation for 
psychoanalysis, particularly since medical education 
gives a false and detrimental attitude towards the 
neuroses. The activity of an untrained analyst does less 
harm to his patients than that of an unskilled surgeon. 
Freud maintains that no one should practice analysis 
who has not acquired the right to do so by a particular 
training. It is said that the authorities, at the instigation 
of the medical profession, want to forbid the practice of 
analysis by laymen altogether. Such a prohibition would 
also affect the nonmedical members of the Psycho- 
analytic Society, who have enjoyed an excellent training 
and have perfected themselves greatly by practice. 
According to Austrian law, a quack (layman) is anyone 
who treats patients without possessing a state diploma to 
prove he is a doctor. Freud proposes another definition: 
a quack is anyone who undertakes a treatment without 
possessing the knowledge and capacities necessary for it. 

1926E 20/239 

The question of lay analysis (1926). Part VII. 

The question of lay analysis is discussed. A medical 
doctor has a decided advantage over a layman in (analytic 
practice regarding the question of diagnosis. The patient 
may exhibit the external picture of a neurosis, and yet it 
may be something else: the beginning of an incurable 
mental disease or the preliminary of brain destruction. If 
a later physical illness can bring about an enfeeblement 
of the ego then that illness can also produce a neurosis. 
If an analyst, medical or otherwise, suspects organic 
illness, Freud maintains that the analyst should call in 
the help of a medical doctor. He lists 3 reasons for it: 1) 
it is not a good plan for a combination of organic and 
psychical treatments to be carried out by the same 
person; 2) the relation in the transference may make it 
inadvisable for the analyst to examine the patient 



t. 




physically; and 3) the analyst has every reason for 
doubting whether he is unprejudiced, since his interests 
are directed so intensely to the psychical factors. For the 
patient, it is a matter ot indifference whether the analyst 
is a doctor or not, provided only that the danger of his 
condition being misunderstood is excluded by the 
necessary medical report before the treatment begins 
and on some possible occasions during the course of it. 
Analytic training cuts across the field of medical 
education, but neither includes the other. Freud did not 
believe that a medical education was necessary for an 
analyst. He did not consider it desirable for an analyst. 
He did not consider it desirable for psychoanalysis to be 
swallowed up by medicine and be subsumed as a 
subordinate area of psychiatry. The training of social 
workers analytically to help combat neuroses was 
envisioned. He thought that the internal development of 
psychoanalysis could never be affected by regulation or 
prohibition. 



1927 A 20/251 

The question of lay analysis (1926). Postscript. (1927). 

The charge against Dr. Theodor Reik, in the Vienna 
Courts, was dropped. The prosecution’s case was too 
weak, and the person who brought the charge as an 
aggrieved party proved an untrustworthy witness. 
Freud’s main thesis in The Question of Lay Analysis was 
that the important question is not whether an analyst 
possesses a medical diploma but whether he has had the 
special training necessary for the practice of analysis. A 
scheme of training for analysts has still to be created. It 
must include elements from the mental sciences, from 
psychology, the history of civilization and sociology, as 
well as from anatomy, biology, and the study of evolu- 
tion. Psychoanalysis is a part of psychology; not of 
medical psychology, not of the psychology of morbid 
processes, but simply of psychology. He enjoins his 
American colleagues not to exclude lay analysts from 
receiving training since this might interest them in raising 
their own ethical and intellectual level while gaining 
influence over them so as to try and prevent their un- 
scrupulous practices. 



1926F 20/261 

Psycho-analysis (1926). Editors note. (1959) and article. 

The Eleventh Edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica 
appeared in 1910and 1911. It contained no reference to 
psychoanalysis. An article on psychoanalysis appeared in 
the Thirteenth Edition, written by Freud himself. This 
article included the prehistory, subject matter, and exter- 
nal history of psychoanalysis. The prehistory includes 



1941E 20/271 

the contribution made by Josef Breuer who, in 1880 
discovered a procedure by means of which he relieved a 
girl, who was suffering from severe hysteria, of her many 
and various symptoms. His cathartic treatment gave 
excellent therapeutic results. Psychoanalysis finds a 
constantly increasing amount of support as a therapeutic 
procedure, owing to the fact that it can do more for its 
patients than any other method of treatment. The prin- 
cipal field of its application is in the milder neuroses: 
hysterias, phobias, and obsessional states. The thera- 
peutic influence of psychoanalysis depends on the re- 
placement of unconscious mental acts by conscious ones 
and is effective within the limits of that factor. The 
analytic theory of the neuroses is based on 3 corner- 
stones: the recognition 1) of repression, 2) of the 
importance of the sexual instinct, and 3) of transference. 
Psychoanalysis in its character of depth psychology 
considers mental life from 3 points of view: dynamic, 
economic, and topographical. The dynamic considers the 
interplay of forces which assist, inhibit, combine, or 
compromise with one another. The forces originate in 
the instincts of which there are 2 types: ego instincts 
and object instincts. The economic considers the quan- 
tum of psychic energy with its charge (cathexis). The 
course of mental processes is regulated by the pleasure- 
unpleasure principle. The pleasure principle is modified 
by the reality principle during the course of develop- 
ment. The topographic considers the mental apparatus is 
composed of the id, ego, superego. The ego and superego 
develop out of the id. The id is wholly unconscious 
while parts of the ego and superego are conscious. The 
beginnings of psychoanalysis may be marked by 2 dates: 
1895, which saw the publication of Breuer and Freud’s 
Studies on Hysteria, and 1900, which saw that of 
Freud’s Interpretation of Dreams. 



1941E 20/271 

Address to the Society of B’nai B’rith (1941, 1926). 

An address to the Society of B’nai B’rith was read on 
Freud’s behalf at a meeting held on May 6, 1926, in 
honor of his seventieth birthday. In the years from 1 895 
onwards, Freud was subjected to 2 powerful impressions 
which combined to produce the same effect on him. On 
the one hand, he had gained his first insight into the 
depths of the life of the human instincts. On the other 
hand, the announcement of his unpleasing discoveries 
had, as its result, the severance of the greater part of his 
human contacts. In his loneliness he was seized with a 
longing to find a circle of picked men of high character 
who would receive him in a friendly spirit in spite of his 
temerity. The B’nai B’rith was pointed out to him. His 
attraction to Jewry consisted of powerful emotional 
forces that could not be expressed in words. Being a Jew 
prepared him to join the opposition and not need the 




156 



147 



«. 



I926B 20/277 



agreement of the “compact majority’ . Because he was a 
Jew, he found himself free from many prejudices which 
restricted others in the use of their intellect. For some 
two-thirds of the long period that elapsed since Freud’s 
entry, he persisted with the B’nai B’rith conscientiously, 
and found refreshment and stimulation in his relations 
with it. The B’nai B’rith was kind enough not to hold it 
against him that during his last third of the time, he kept 
away. He was overwhelmed with work, and the demands 
connected with his work forced themselves on him. The 
day ceased to be long enough for him to attend the 
meetings. Finally came the years of his illness. Freud 
concluded that the B’nai B’rith meant a great deal to 
him. 

1926B 20/277 
Karl Abraham (1926). 

Dr. Karl Abraham, President of the Berlin group, of 
which he was the founder, and President at the time of 
the International Psychoanalytical Association, died in 
Berlin on December 25, 1925. He had not reached the 
age of 50. Among all those who followed Freud along 
the dark paths of psychoanalytic research, Abraham won 
so preeminent a place that only one other name could be 
set beside his, Ferenczi. It is likely that the boundless 
trust of his colleagues and pupils would have called him 
to the leadership; and he would, without doubt, have 
been a model leader in the pursuit of truth, led astray 
neither by the praise or blame of the many nor by the 
seductive illusion of his own phantasies. 

1926A 20/279 
To Romain Roll and (1926). 

A letter to Romain Rolland on the occasion of his 
sixtieth birthday, is presented. Freud honored him as an 
artist and as an apostle of the love of mankind. When 
Freud came to know Romain Rolland personally, Freud 
was surprised to find that he valued strength and energy 
so highly and that he embodied such force of will. 

1926C 20/280 

Prefatory note to a paper by E. Pickworth Farrow 
(1926). 

A prefatory note to a paper by E. Pickworth Farrow 
is presented. Farrow is a man of strong and independent 
intelligence. He failed to get on to good terms with 2 
analysts with whom he made the attempt. He thereupon 
proceeded to make a systematic application of the pro- 
cedure of self-analysis which Freud himself employed in 
the past for the analysis of his own dreams. His work 
deserves attention because of the peculiar character of 
his personality and his technique. 



VOL. XXI The Future of an Illusion, 
Civilization and its Discontents 
and Other Works (1927—1931) 

1927C 21/3 

The future of an illusion (1927). Editor’s note (1961) 
and Part I. Civilization rests upon renunciation of 
instinctual wishes. 

The Future of an Illusion began a series of studies 
which were to be Freud’s major concern for the rest of 
his life. Human civilization presents 2 aspects to the 
observer. It includes all the knowledge and capacity that 
men have acquired in order to control the forces of 
nature and extract its wealth for the satisfaction of 
human needs, and, all the regulations necessary in order 
to adjust the relations of men to one another and espe- 
cially the distribution of the available wealth. One gets 
an impression that civilization is something which was 
imposed on a resisting majority by a minority which 
understood how to obtain possession of the means to 
power and coercion. It is only through the influence of 
individuals who can set an example and whom masses 
recognize as their leaders that they can be induced to 
perform the work and undeigo the renunciations on 
which the existence of civilization depends. All is well if 
these leaders are persons who possess superior insight 
into the necessities of life and who have risen to the 
height of mastering their own instinctual wishes. But 
there is a danger that in order not to lose their influence 
they may give way to the mass more than it gives way to 
them, and it therefore seems necessary that they will be 
independent of the mass by having means to power at 
their disposal. 

1927C 21/10 

The future of an illusion (1927). Part II. Consequences 
of instinctual renunciation. Part III. In what does the 
peculiar value of religious ideas lie. 

Every civilization rests on a compulsion to work and 
a renunciation of instinct and therefore inevitably pro- 
vokes opposition from those affected by these demands. 
The fact that an instinct cannot be satisfied is a frustra- 
tion. The regulation by which this frustration is estab- 
lished is called a prohibition, and the condition which is 
produced by this prohibition is called a privation. The 
privations which affect everyone include the instinctual 
wishes of incest, cannibalism, and lust for killing. People 
will be only too readily inclined to include among the 
psychical assets of a culture its ideals. The narcissistic 
satisfaction provided by the cultural ideal rests upon 
pride in what has already been successfully achieved and 
is also among the forces which are successful in com- 
bating the hostility to culture within the cultural unit. A 
different kind of satisfaction is afforded by art to the 



148 

157 






1927C 21/40 



participants in a cultural unit; it offers substitutive satis- 
faction for the oldest and still most deeply felt cultural 
renunciations. A store of religious ideas was created, 
born from man’s need to make his helplessness tolerable 
and built up from the material of memories of the help- 
lessness of his own childhood and the childhood of the 
human race. The possession of these ideas protects him 
in 2 directions, against the dangers of nature and Fate, 
and against the injuries that threaten him from human 
society itself. 

1927C 21/21 

The future of an illusion (1927). Part IV. Origins of 
religions. 

Freud tried to show that religious ideas have arisen 
from the same need as have all the other achievements of 
civilization: from the necessity of defending oneself 
against the crushingly superior force of nature. To this, a 
second motive was added: the urge to rectify the short- 
comings of civilization which made themselves painfully 
felt. When the growing individual finds that he is des- 
tined to remain a child forever, that he can never do 
without protection against strange superior powers, he 
lends those powers the features belonging to the figure 
of his father; he creates for himself the gods whom he 
dreads, whom he seeks to propitiate, and whom he 
nevertheless entrusts with his own protection. Thus his 
longing for a father is a motive identical with his need 
for protection against the consequences of his human 
weakness. The defense against childish helplessness is 
what lends its characteristic features to the adult’s reac- 
tion to the helplessness which he has to acknowledge, a 
reaction which is precisely the formation of religion. 

1927C 21/25 

The future of an illusion (1927). Part V. The psycho- 
logical significance of religious ideas. Part VI. Religious 
ideas are illusions. 

Religious ideas are teachings and assertions about 
facts and conditions of external or internal reality which 
tell one something one has not discovered for oneself 
and which lay claim to one’s belief. Since they give us 
information about what is most important and interest- 
ing to us in life, they are particularly highly prized. 
Religious teachings base their claim to belief firstly 
because they were already believed by our primal ances- 
tors; secondly, we possess proofs which have been 
handed down to us from these same primeval times; and 
thirdly, it is forbidden to raise the question of their 
authentication at all. Illusions are derived from human 
wishes. Freud maintains that religious doctrines are 
psychological illusions and are therefore insusceptible of 
proof. 



1927C 21/34 

The future of an illusion (1927). Part VII. Relations 
between civilization and religion. 

Religion has performed great services for human 
civilization. It has contributed much, but not enough, 
towards the taming of the asocial instincts. It has ruled 
human society for many thousands of years and has had 
time to show what it can achieve. If it had succeeded in 
making the majority of mankind happy, in comforting 
them, in reconciling them to life, and in making them 
into vehicles of civilization, no one would dream of 
attempting to alter the existing conditions. However, 
there is an appalling large number of people who are 
dissatisfied with civilization and unhappy with it. Civili- 
zation has little to fear from educated people and brain 
workers. In them, the replacement of religious motives 
for civilized behavior by other, secular motives would 
proceed unobtrusively; moreover, such people are to a 
large extent themselves vehicles of civilization. But it is 
another matter with the great mass of the uneducated 
and oppressed, who have every reason for being enemies 
of civilization. Either these dangerous masses must be 
held down most severely and kept most carefully away 
from any chance of intellectual awakening, or else the 
relationship between civilization and religion must 
undergo a fundamental revision. 

1927C 21/40 

The future of an illusion (1927). Part VIII. Religion is a 
substitute for rationality. 

When civilization laid down the commandment that a 
man shall not kill the neighbor whom he hates or who is 
in his way or whose property he covets, this was clearly 
done in the interest of man’s communal existence, which 
would not otherwise be practicable. The primal father 
was the original image of God, the model on which later 
generations have shaped the figure of God. God actually 
played a part in the genesis of that prohibition; it was 
His influence, not any insight into social necessity, 
which created it. Men knew that they had disposed of 
their father by violence, and in their reaction to that 
impious deed, they determined to respect his will thence 
forward. The store of religious ideas includes not only 
wish fulfillments but important historical recollections. 
The analogy between religion and obsessional neurosis 
has been repeatedly demonstrated. Many of the peculi- 
arities and vicissitudes in the formation of religion can 
be understood in that light. It is proposed that certain 
religious doctrines should cease to be put forward as the 
reasons for the precepts of civilization. The religious 
teachings are viewed as neurotic relics and Freud states 
that the time has come for replacing the effects of re- 
pression by the results of the rational operation of the 
intellect. 



149 

158 



1927C 21/46 



1927C 21/46 

The future of an illusion (1927). Part IX. Is rationality 
possible. Part X. Relation of religion to science. 

A believer is bound to the teachings of religion by 
certain ties of affection. It is certainly senseless to begin 
by trying to do away with religion by force and at a 
single blow. Religion is comparable to a childhood 
neurosis, and just as so many children grow out of their 
similar neurosis, so mankind will surmount this neurotic 
phase. The primacy of the intellect lies in a distant 
future, but probably not in an infinitely distant one. It 
will presumably set for itself the same aims as those 
whose realization you expect from your God, namely, 
the love of man and the decrease of suffering. Our 
mental apparatus has been developed precisely in the 
attempt to explore the external world, and it must there- 
fore have realized in its structure some degree of expe- 
diency. It is itself a constituent part of the world which 
we set to investigate, and it readily admits of such an 
investigation. The task of science is fully covered if we 
limit it to showing how the world must appear to us in 
consequence of the particular characrr of our organiza- 
tion. The ultimate findings of science, precisely because 
of the way in which they are acquired, are determined 
not only by our organization but by the things which 
have affected that organization. The problem of the 
nature of the world without regard to our percipient 
mental apparatus is an empty abstraction, devoid of 
practical interest. Science is no illusion. But it would be 
an illusion to suppose that what science cannot give us 
we can get elsewhere. 

1930A 21/59 

Civilization and its discontents (1930). Editor’s intro- 
duction. (1961). 

The main theme of Civilization and Its Discontents, 
the irrem diable antagonism between the demands of 
instinct and the re strictions of civilization may be traced 
back to some of Freud’s very earliest psychological writ- 
ings. The construction of dams against the sexual in- 
stinct during the latency period of childhood is organi- 
cally determined and fixed by heredity, rather than 
being solely a product of educatioa The history of 
Freud’s views on the aggressive or destructive instinct is 
a complicated one. Throughout his earlier writings, the 
context in which he viewed it predominantly was that of 
sadism. Later on, the original independence of the ag- 
gressive impulses was recognized. The independent 
sources indicated, were to be traced to the self- 
preservative instincts. Impulses of aggressiveness, and of 
hatred too, had from the first seemed to belong to the 
self-preservative instinct, and since this was subsumed 
under the libido, no independent aggressive instinct was 
called for. This was so in spite of the bipolarity of object 
relations, of the frequent admixtures of love and hate, 



and of the complex origin of hate itself. It was not until 
Freud’s hypothesis of a death instinct that a truly 
independent aggressive instinct came into view in Beyond 
the Pleasure Principle. In Freud’s later writings, the 
aggressive instinct was still something secondary, derived 
from the primary self-destructive death instinct, al- 
though in the present work the stress is much more upon 
the death instinct’s manifestations outwards. 

1930A 21/64 

Civilization and its discontents (1930). Part I. Man’s 
need for religion arises from feelings of helplessness. 

It is impossible to escape the impression that people 
commonly use false standards of measurement, that they 
seek power, success and wealth for themselves and 
admire them in others, and that they underestimate 
what is of true value in life. However, we are in danger 
of forgetting how variegated the human world and its 
mental life are. One objection to Freud’s treatment of 
religion as an illusion was that he had not properly 
appreciated the true source of religious sentiments, 
which were in an oceanic feeling of something limitless, 
of being one with the external world as a whole. The 
genetic explanation of such a feeling concludes that 
originally the ego includes everything and later it sepa- 
rates an external world from itself. Our present ego feel- 
ing is only a shrunken residue of a much more inclusive, 
all embracing feeling which corresponded to a more 
intimate bond between the ego and the world about it. 
Thus, although we are willing to acknowledge that the 
’ oceanic” feeling exists in many people, it is not the 
origin of the religious attitude, which can be traced back 
to the feeling of infantile helplessness. 

1930A 21/74 

Civilization and its discontents (1930). Part II. Man 
copes with unhappiness through diversion, substitution 
and intoxication. 

The question of the purpose of human life has been 
raised countless times; it has never yet received a satis- 
factory answer. Men strive after happiness. This en- 
deavor has two sides: it aims at an absence of pain and 
unpleasure, and at the experiencing of strong feelings of 
pleasure. One of the methods of averting suffering is the 
chemical one, intoxication. Another technique is the 
employment of displacements of libido which our men- 
tal apparatus permits of and through which its function 
gains so much in flexibility. In another procedure, satis- 
faction is obtained from illusions, which are recognized 
as such without the discrepancy between them and 
reality being allowed to interfere with enjoyment. 
Another procedure regards reality as the sole enemy and 
as the source of all suffering, with which it is impossible 
to live, so that one must break off all relations with it if 
one is to be happy in any way. Happiness in life can be 



150 

159 



1930A 21/108 



predominantly sought in the enjoyment of beauty. The 
man who is predominantly erotic will give first perfer- 
ence to his emotional relationships to other people; the 
narcissistic man, who inclines to be self-sufficient, will 
seek his main satisfactions in his internal mental pro- 
cesses; the man of action will never give up the external 
world on which he can try out his strength. Religion 
restricts the play of choice and adaption, since it im- 
poses equally on everyone its own path to the acquisi- 
tion of happiness and protection from suffering. 

1930 A 21/86 

Civilization and its discontents (1930). Part III. Man’s 
conflict with civilization: Liberty versus equality. 

Suffering comes from three sources: the superior 
power of nature, the feebleness of our own bodies, and 
the inadequacy of the regulations which adjust the mu- 
tual relationships of human beings in the family, the 
state and society. Civilization describes the whole sum 
of the achievement and the regulations which distinguish 
our lives from those of our animal ancestors and which 
serve two purposes: to protect men against nature and 
to adjust their mutual relations. We recognize as cultural 
all activities and resources which are useful to men for 
making the earth serviceable to them and for protecting 
them against the violence of the forces of nature. The 
first acts of civilization were the use of tools, the gaining 
of control over fire and the construction of dwellings. 
Psychoanalytic experience regularly testifies to the con- 
nection between ambition, fire, and urethal eroticism. 
We recognize that countries have attained a high level of 
civilization if we find that in them everything which can 
assist in the exploitation of the earth by man and in his 
protection against the forces is attended to and effec- 
tively carried out. Beauty, cleanliness, and order occupy 
a special position among the requirements of civilization. 
No feature seems better to characterize civilization than 
its esteem and encouragement of man’s higher mental 
activities, his intellectual, scientific, and artistic achieve- 
ments, and the leading role that it assigns to ideas in 
human life. Foremost among those ideas are the religious 
systems; next come the speculations of pliilosophy; and 
finally what might be called man’s ideals— his ideas of a 
possible perfection of individuals, or of peoples, or of 
the whole of humanity and the demands he sets up on 
the basis of such ideas. 

1930A 21/99 

Civilization and its discontents (1930). Part IV. Two pil- 
lars of civilization: Eros and Ananke. 

After primal man had discovered that it lay in his 
own hands, literally, to improve his lot on earth by 
working, it cannot have been a matter of indifference to 
him whether another man worked with or against him. 



The other man acquired the value for him of a fellow 
worker. Man’s discovery that sexual love afforded him 
the strongest experiences of satisfaction, and in fact pro- 
vided him with the prototype of all happiness, must have 
suggested to him that he should continue to seek the 
satisfaction of happiness in his life along the path of 
sexual relations and that he should make genital eroti- 
cism the central point of his life. With the assumption of 
an erect posture by man and with the depreciation of his 
sense of smell, it was not only his anal eroticism which 
threatened to fall victim to organic repression, but the 
whole of his sexuality, leading since then to a repug- 
nance which prevents its complete satisfaction and 
forces it away from the sexual aim into sublimations and 
libidinal displacements. The love which founded the 
family continues to operate in civilization both in its 
original form, in which it does not renounce direct sex- 
ual satisfaction, and in its modified form as aim- 
inhibited affection. In each, it continues to carry on its 
function of binding together considerable numbers of 
people, and it does so in a more intensive fashion than 
can be effected through the interest of work in common. 
The tendency on the part of civilization to restrict sex- 
ual life is no less clear than its other tendency to expand 
the cultural unit. 

1930 A 21/108 

Civilization and its discontents (1930). Part V. Security 
at the cost of restricting sexuality and aggression. 

Psychoanalytic work has shown us that it is precisely 
the frustrations of sexual life which people known as 
neurotics, cannot tolerate. The neurotic creates sub- 
stitutive satisfactions for himself in his symptoms, and 
these either cause him suffering in themselves or become 
sources of suffering for him by raising difficulties in his 
relations with his environment and the society he be- 
longs to. Men are not gentle creatures who want to be 
loved, and who at the most can defend themselves if 
they are attacked; they are, on the contrary, creatures 
whose instinctual endowments include a powerful share 
of aggressiveness. The existence of this inclination to 
aggression is the factor which disturbs our relations with 
our neighbor and which forces civilization into such a 
high expenditure of energy. In consequence of this pri- 
mary mutual hostility of human beings, civilized society 
is perpetually threatened with disintegration. The com- 
munist system is based on an untenable psychological 
illusion, for in abolishing private property, we have in no 
way altered the differences in power and influence 
which are misused by aggression, nor have we altered 
anything in its nature. Because of civilization’s imposi- 
tion of such great sacrifices on man’s sexuality and 
aggression, civilized man has exchanged a portion of his 
possibilities of happiness for a portion of security. 

151 



455-582 0 - 72-11 



1930A 21/117 



1930A 21/117 

Civilization and its discontents (1930). Part VI. Argu- 
ments for an instinct of aggression and destruction. 

The theory of the instincts is the one part of analytic 
theory that has felt its way the most painfully forward. 
At first the ego instincts (hunger) and the object in- 
stincts (love) confronted each other. The introduction of 
the concept of narcissism convinced Freud that the 
instincts could not all be of the same kind. Besides the 
instinct to preserve living substance and to join it into 
ever larger units, there must exist another, contrary 
instinct seeking to dissolve those units. Thus, as well as 
Eros, there was an instinct of death, the activities of 
which were not easy to demonstrate. A portion of the 
instinct is diverted towards the external world and 
comes to light as an instinct of aggressiveness and de- 
structiveness. Sadism and masochism are examples of 
Eros and the death instinct appearing as allies with each 
other. Even where it emerges without any sexual pur- 
pose, the satisfaction of the instinct through destruc- 
tiveness is accompanied by an extraordinarily high de- 
gree of narcissistic enjoyment. The inclination to aggres- 
sion is an original, self-subsisting instinctual disposition. 
It constitutes the greatest impediment to civilization. 
Civilization is a process in the service of Eros, whose 
purpose is to combine single human individuals, and 
after that families, then places, peoples, and nations, 
into one great unity, the unity of mankind. The wcric of 
Eros is precisely this. The aggressive instinct is the de- 
rivative and the main representative of the death instinct 
which we have found alongside of Eros and which shares 
- world dominion with it. The evolution of civilization 
must present the struggle between Eros and Death, 
between the instinct of life and the instinct of destruc- 
tion, as it works itself out in the human species. 

1930A 21/123 

Civilization and its discontents (1930). Part VII. De- 
velopment of the superego and its severity. 

Civilization obtains mastery over the individual’s 
dangerous desire for aggression by weakening and 
disarming it and by setting up an agency within him to 
watch over it, like a garrison in a conquered city. There 
are 2 origins of the sense of guilt: one arising from fear 
of an authority, and the other, later on, arising from fear 
of the superego. The first insists upon a renunciation of 
instinctual satisfactions; the second, as well as doing this, 
presses for punishment, since the continuance of the 
forbidden wishes cannot be concealed from the super- 
ego. The severity of the superego is simply a continua- 
tion of the severity of the external authority, to which it 
has succeeded and which it has in part replaced. Since 
civilization obeys an internal erotic impulsion which 
causes human beings to unite in a closely knit group, it 
can only achieve this aim through an ever increasing 



reinforcement of the sense of guilt. If civilization is a 
necessary course of development from the family to 
humanity as a whole, then there is inextricably bound 
up with it an increase of the sense of guilt, which will 
perhaps reach heights that the individual finds hard to 
tolerate. 

1930A 21/134 

Civilization and its discontents (1930). Part VIII. Con- 
clusions about effects of civilization upon psyche. 

The superego is an agency which has been inferred by 
Freud; conscience is a function which Freud ascribes, 
among other functions, to that agency. This function 
consists in keeping a watch over the actions and 
intentions of the ego and judging them, in exercising a 
censorship. The sense of guilt, the harshness of the 
superego, is thus the same thing as the severity of the 
conscience. In the developmental process of the individ- 
ual, the program of the pleasure principle, which consists 
in finding the satisfaction of happiness, is retained as the 
main aim. Integration in, or adaptation to, a human 
community appears as a scarcely avoidable condition 
which must be fulfilled before this aim of happiness can 
be achieved. The development of the individual seems to 
be a product of the interaction between two urges, the 
urge towards happiness, which is usually called egoistic, 
and the urge towards union with others in the commu- 
nity, which is called altruistic. It can be asserted that the 
community evolves a superego under whose influence 
cultural development proceeds. The cultural superego 
has set up its ideals and set up its demands. Among the 
latter, those which deal with the relations of human 
beings to one another are comprised under the heading 
of ethics. The fateful question for the human species 
seems to be whether and to what extent their cultural 
development will succeed in mastering the disturbance 
of their communal life by the human instinct of 
aggression and self-destruction. 

1927E 21/149 

Fetishism (1927). Editor’s note. (1961). 

Fetishism was finished at the end of the first week of 
August, 1927 and was published in the autumn of 1927. 
The paper is of importance as a bringing together and 
enlarging on Freud’s earlier views on fetishism. Its major 
interest lies in a fresh metapsychological development 
which it introduces. For several years past Freud had 
been using the concept of disavowal especially in 
relation to children’s reactions to the observation of the 
anatomical distinction between the sexes. In the present 
paper, basing himself on fresh clinical observations, he 
puts forward reasons for supposing that this disavowal 
necessarily implies a split in the subject’s ego. 



152 



1928B 21/175 



1927E 21/152 

Fetishism (1927) 

Freud had an opportunity of studying analytically a 
number of men whose object choice was dominated by a 
fetish. The most extraordinary case seemed to be one in 
which a young man had exalted a certain sort of shine 
on the nose into a fetishistic precondition. The fetish, 
which originated from his earliest childhood, had to be 
understood in his native English, not German. The shine 
on the nose was in reality a glance at the nose. The nose 
was thus the fetish. In every instance, the meaning and 
the purpose of the fetish turned out, in analysis, to be 
the same. The fetish is a substitute for the penis: the 
woman’s (the mother’s) penis that the little boy once 
believed in and does not want to give up. The fetish 
achieves a token of triumph over the threat of castration 
and serves as a protection against it. It also saves the 
fetishist from becoming a homosexual, by endowing 
women with the characteristic which makes them 
tolerable as sexual objects. Because the fetish is easily 
accessible, the fetishist can readily obtain the sexual 
satisfaction attached to it. The choice of the fetish 
object seems determined by the last impression before 
the uncanny and traumatic one. In very subtle instances 
both the disavowal and the affirmation of the castration 
have found their way into the construction of the fetish 
itself. In conclusion, Freud says that the normal proto- 
type of fetishes is a man’s penis, just as the normal 
prototype of interior organ is a woman’s real small 
penis, the clitoris. 

1927D 21/160 

Humour (1927). 

Humor is discussed. There are two ways in which the 
humorous process can take place. It may take place in 
regard to a single person, who himself adopts the 
humorous attitude, while a second person plays the pait 
of the spectator who derives enjoyment from it; or it 
may take place between two persons, of whom one takes 
no part at all in the humorous process, but is made the 
object of humorous contemplation by the other. Like 
jokes and the comic, humor has something liberating 
about it; but it also has something of grandeur and 
elevation, which is lacking in the other two ways of 
obtaining pleasure from intellectual activity. The gran- 
deur in it clearly lies in the trumph of narcissism, the 
victorious assertion of the ego’s invulnerability. The 
rejection of the claims of reality and the putting through 
of the pleasure principle bring humor near to the 
regressive or reactionary processes which engage our 
attention so extensively in psychopathology. In a partic- 
ular situation the subject suddenly hypercathects his 
superego and then, proceeding from it, alters the 
reactions of the ego. A joke is the contribution to the 



comic by the unconscious. In just the same way, humor 
would be the contribution made to the comic through 
the agency of the superego. If the superego tries, by 
means of humor, to console the ego and protect it from 
suffering, this does not contradict its origin in the 
parental agency. 

1928A 21/167 

A religious experience (1928). 

In the autumn of 1927, G. S. Viereck, a journalist, 
published an account of a conversation with Freud, in 
the course of which he mentioned Freud's lack of 
religious faith and his indifference on the subject of 
survival after death. This interview was widely read and 
brought many letters. One was from an American 
physician who wrote to tell Freud of his religious 
experience. The physician described a woman who was 
in the dissecting room and he thought that God would 
not allow such a thing to happen. For the next several 
days, he meditated and then received the proof that he 
needed that there is a God. Freud thinks that the doctor 
is swayed by the emotion roused in him by the sight of a 
woman’s dead body which reminded him of his mother. 
It roused in him a longing for his mother which sprang 
from his Oedipus complex; this was immediately com- 
pleted by a feeling of indignation against his father. His 
ideas of father and God had not yet become widely 
separated; his desire to destroy his father could become 
conscious as doubt in the existence of God and could 
seek to justify itself in the eyes of reason as indignation 
about the ill-treatment of a mother object. The outcome 
of the struggle was displayed in the sphere of religion 
and it was of a kind predetermined by the fate of the 
Oedipus complex: complete submission to the will of 
God the Father. He had had a religious experience and 
had undergone conversion. This case may throw some 
light on the psychology of conversion in general. 

1928B 21/175 

Dostoevsky and parricide (1928). Editor’s note. (1961). 

The essay on Dostoevsky and Parricide falls into two 
distinct parts. The first deals with Dostoevsky’s charac- 
ter in general, with his masochism, his sense of guilt, his 
epileptoid attacks and his double attitude in the Oedipus 
complex. The second discusses the special point of his 
passion for gambling and leads to an account of a short 
story by Stefan Zweig which throws light on the genesis 
of that addiction. The essay contains Freud’s first 
discussion of hysterical attacks since his early paper on 
the subject written 20 years before, a restatement of his 
later views on the Oedipus complex and the sense of 
guilt, and a sidelight on the problem of masturbation. 
Above all, Freud had an opportunity here forexpressing 
his views on a writer whom he placed in the very front 
rank of all. 



153 



1928B 21/177 



> 



1928B 21/177 

Dostoevsky and parricide (1928). 

Four facets may be distinguished in the rich personal- 
ity of Dostoevsky: the creative artist, the neurotic, the 
moralist, and the sinner. Dostoevsky called himself an 
epileptic, and was regarded as such by other people. It is 
highly probable that this so-called epilepsy was only a 
symptom of his neurosis and must be classified as 
hysteroepilepsy. Dostoevsky’s attacks did not assume 
epileptic form until after his eighteenth year, when his 
father was murdered. Prior to that, however, he suffered 
in his early years from lethargic, somnolent states, 
signifying an identification with someone whom he 
wished dead. Parricide, according to a well-known view, 
is the principal and primal crime of humanity as well as 
of the individual. It is the main source of the sense of 
guilt. It comes from the Oedipus complex. What makes 
hatred of the father unacceptable is fear of the father; 
castration is terrible, whether as a punishment or as the 
price of love. The addition of a second factor to the fear 
of punishment, the fear of the feminine attitude, a 
strong innate bisexual disposition, becomes the rein- 
forcement of the neurosis. The publication of 
Dostoevsky’s posthumous papers and of his wife’s diaries 
has thrown a glaring light on the period in Germany 
when he was obsessed with a mania for gambling, which 
no one could regard as anything but an unmistakable fit 
of pathological passion. If the addiction to gambling, 
with the unsuccessful struggles to break the habit and 
the opportunities it affords for self-punishment, is a 
repetition of the compulsion to masturbate, we shall not 
be surprised to find that it occupied such a large space in 
Dostoevsky’s life. In all cases of severe neurosis, the 
efforts to supress autoerotic satisfaction and their 
relation to fear of the father are well known. 

1928B 21/195 

Dostoevsky and parricide (1928). Appendix: A letter 
from Freud to Theodor Reik. 

A few months after the publication of Freud’s essay 
on Dostoevsky, a discussion of it by Theodor Reik 
appeared in Imago. Freud wrote to Dr. Reik in reply. 
Reik argued that Freud’s judgment on Dostoevsky’s 
morals was unjustifiably severe and disagreed with what 
Freud wrote about morality. Freud acknowledged that 
all the objections deserve consideration and must be 
recognized as, in a sense, apt. We may expect, wrote 
Freud, that in the history of a neurosis accompanied by 
such a severe sense of guilt, a special part will be played 
by the struggle against masturbation, as evidenced by 
Dostoevsky’s pathological addiction to gambling. Freud 
wrote that he holds firmly to a scientifically objective 
social assessment of ethics. He included Dostoevsky the 
psychologist under the creative artist, as Reik suggests. 
Freud wrote that, in spite of all his admiration for 



Dostoevsky’s intensity and preeminence, he does not 
really like him because having become exhausted with 
pathological natures in analysis, he finds himself intoler- 
ant of them in art and life. 

1929B 21/199 

Some dreams of Descartes: A letter to Maxime Leroy. 
(1929). 

While Maxime Leroy was preparing his book on 
Descartes, he submitted a series of the philosopher’s 
dreams to Freud for his comments. Descartes’ original 
account and interpretation of the dreams seem to have 
occupied the opening pages of a manuscript known as 
the ‘Olympica’. It was seen by the seventeenth century 
abbe, Adrien Baiilet, who published a paraphrased 
translation, containing some quotations from the origi- 
nal Latin. Freud states that the philosopher’s dreams aie 
what are known as dreams from above. That is to say, 
they are formulations of ideas which could have been 
created just as well in a waking state as during the state 
of sleep, and which have derived their content only in 
certain parts from mental states at a comparatively deep 
level. That is why these dreams offer, for the most part, 
a content which has an abstract, poetic, or symbolic 
form. Analysis of dreams of this kind usually leads to 
the position that the analyst cannot understand the 
dream but the dreamer can translate it immediately 
because its content is very close to his conscious 
thoughts. It is those parts of the dream about which the 
dreamer does not know what to say that belong to the 
unconscious. 

1930E 21/207 

The Goethe Prize (1930). 

In a letter to Dr. Alfons Paquet, Freud asserts that 
the award of the Goethe Prize of the City of Frankfurt 
has given him great pleasure. The address delivered in the 
Goethe house at Frankfurt is presented. Freud’s life 
work has been directed to a single aim. He has observed 
the more subtle disturbances of mental function in 
healthy and sick people and has sought to infer from 
signs of this kind how the apparatus which serves those 
functions is constructed and what concurrent and 
mutually opposing forces are at work in it. Goethe can 
be compared in versatility to Leonardo da Vinci, who 
like him was both artist and scientific investigator. 
Goethe approached psychoanalysis at a number of 
points, recognized much through his own insight that 
has since been confirmed, and some views, which have 
brought criticism and mockery down upon us, were 
expounded by him as self-evident. Thus he was familiar 
with the incomparable strength of the first affective ties 
of human creatures. Goethe always rated Eros high, 
never tried to belittle its power, followed its primitive 
and even wanton expressions with no less attentiveness 

154 



0 

ERIC 



163 



1931B 21/235 



than its highly sublimated ones and has expounded its 
essential unity throughout all its manifestations no less 
decisively than Plato did in the remote past. 

1931A 21/215 

Libidinal types (1931). 

Libidinal types are discussed. As the libido is pre- 
dominatly allocated to the provinces of the mental 
apparatus, we can distinguish three main libidinal types: 
erotic, narcissistic, and obsessional types. Erotics are 
those whose main interest is turned towards love. The 
obsessional type is distinguished by the predominance of 
the superego. In the narcissistic type, there is no tension 
between ego and superego and there is no preponderance 
of erotic needs. The subject’s main interest is directed to 
self-preservation; he is independent and not open to 
intimidation. There are mixed types too: the erotic 
obsessional, the erotic narcissistic, and the narcissistic 
obsessional. These seem to afford a good classification of 
the individual psychical structures. In the erotic obses- 
sional type, it appears that the preponderance of 
instinctual life is restricted by the influence of the 
superego. The erotic narcissistic type is perhaps the one 
we must regard as the commonest of all. It unites 
opposites, which are able to moderate one another in it. 
The narcissistic obsessional type produces the variation 
which is most valuable from a cultural standpoint; for it 
adds to independence of the external world and a regard 
for the demands of conscience, a capacity for vigorous 
actions, and it strengthens the ego against the superego. 
When people of the erotic type fall ill, they will develop 
hysteria, just as those of the obsessional type will 
develop obsessional neurosis. People of the narcissistic 
type are peculiarly disposed to psychosis. 

1931 B 21/223 

Female sexuality (1931). Editor’s note (1961) and Part 
I. Female Oedipus complex differs from male. 

Female Sexuality is a restatement of the findings first 
announced by Freud 6 years earlier in his paper on 
“Some Psychical Consequences of the Anatomical Dis- 
tinction between the Sexes”. This paper, however, lays 
further emphasis on Ihe inter sity and long duration of 
the little girl’s pre-Oedipus attachment to her mother. 
During the phase of the normal Oedipus complex, we 
find the child tenderly attached to the parent of the 
opposite sex, while its relation to the parent of its own 
sex is predominantly hostile. The development of female 
sexuality is complicated by the fact that the girl has the 
task of giving up what was originally her leading genital 
zone, the clitoris, in favor of a new zone, the vagina. 
There are many women who have a strong attachment to 
their father. Where the woman’s attachment to her 
father was particularly intense, analysis showed that it 



has been preceded by a phase of exclusive attachment to 
her mother which had been equally intense and passion- 
ate. Except for the change of her love object, the second 
phase had scarcely added any new feature to her erotic 
life. The duration of this attachment had been greatly 
underestimated . In several cases it lasted until well into 
the fourth year, so that it covered by far the longer part 
of the period of early sexual efflorescence. 

1931B 21/227 

Fern tie sexuality (1931). Part II. Girl’s pre-Oedipal 
mo *es for turning away from mother. 

A woman’s strong dependence on her father takes 
over the heritage of an equally strong attachment to her 
mother. A female’s first love object must be her mother. 
But at the end of her development, her father should 
have become her new love object. One thing that is left 
over in men from the influence of the Oedipus complex 
is a certain amount of disparagement in their attitude 
towards women, whom they regard as being castrated. 
The female acknowledges the fact of her castration, and 
with it, too, the superiority of the male and her own 
inferiority; but she rebels against this unwelcome state 
of affairs. From this divided attitude three lines of 
development open up. The first leads to a general 
revulsion from sexuality. The second leads her to cling 
with defiant self-assertiveness to her threatened mascu- 
linity. Only if her development follows the third, very 
circuitous path does she reach the final normal female 
attitude, in which she takes her father as her object and 
so finds her way to the feminine form of the Oedipus 
complex. The range of motives for turning away from 
the mother include: failure to provide the girl with the 
only proper genital, failure to feed her sufficiently, 
compelling her to share her mother’s love with others, 
failure to fulfill all the girl’s expectations of love, and an 
arousal of her sexual activity and then a forbidding of it. 

1931B 21/235 

Female sexuality (1931). Part III. Girl’s prc-Oedipal 
sexual aims toward mother. 

The girl’s sexual aims in regard to her mother are 
active as well as passive and are determined by the 
libidinal phases through which the child passes. The first 
sexual and sexually-colored experiences which a child 
has in relation to its mother are of a passive character. It 
is suckled, fed, cleaned, and dressed by her, and taught 
to perform all its functions. A part of its libido goes on 
clinging to those experiences and enjoys the satisfactions 
bound up with them; but another part strives to turn 
them into activity. The sexual activity of little girls in 
relation to their mother is manifested chronologically in 
oral, sadistic, and finally even in phallic trends directed 
towards her. Girls regularly accuse their mother of 

155 



0 

ERIC 



164 



1931B 21/240 



seducing them. The turning away from her mother is an 
extremely important step in the course of a little girl’s 
development. 

1931B 21/240 

Female sexuality (1931). Part IV. Critique of analytic 
literature on female sexuality. 

Female sexuality is discussed. Arbraham’s description 
of the manifestations of the castration complex in the 
female is still unsurpassed; but Freud would have been 
glad if it had included the factor cf the girl’s original 
exclusive attachment to her mother. Freud is in 
agreement with the principal points in Jeanne Lampl-de 
Groot’s important paper. In this the complete identity 
of the pre-Oedipus phase in boys and girls is recognized, 
and the girl’s sexual (phallic) activity towards her 
mother is affirmed and substantiated by observations. In 
Helene Deutsch’s paper on feminine masochism and its 
relation to frigidity, the girl’s phallic activity and the 
intensity of her attachment to her mother are recog- 
nized. Helene Deutsch states further that the girl’s 
turning towards her father takes place via her passive 
trends. Fenichel rightly emphasizes the difficulty of 
recognizing in the material produced in analysis what 
parts of it represent the unchanged content of the 
pre-Oedipus phase and what parts have been distorted by 
regression. Some writers are inclined to reduce the 
importance of the child’s first and most original libidinal 
impulses in favor of later developmental processes so 
that the only role left to the former is merely to indicate 
certain paths, while the psychical intensities which flow 
along those paths are supplied by later regressions and 
reaction formations. 

19261 21/247 

Dr. Reik and the problem of quackery. A letter to the 
‘Neue Freie Presse’ (1926). 

A letter to the Neue Freie Presse concerning Dr. Reik 
and the problem of quackery is presented. Freud 
acknowledged that he availed himself of Reik’s skill in 
particularly difficult cases, but only where the symp- 
toms lay in a sphere far removed from the physical one. 
Freud never failed to inform a patient that Reik was not 
a physician but a psychologist. His daughter Anna has 
devoted herself to the pedagogic analysis of children and 
adolescents. Freud never referred a case of severe neu- 
rotic illness in an adult to her. In The Question of Lay 
Analysis, Freud tried to show what psychoanalysis is and 
what demands it makes on the analyst. The conclusion 
was drawn that any mechanical application to trained 
analysts of the section against quackery in the criminal 
code is open to grave doubts. 



1929A 21/249 

Dr. Ernest Jones (on his 50th birthday) (1929). 

Dr. Ernest Jones, on his fiftieth birthday, is discussed 
and praised. Among the men who. met at Salzburg in the 
spring of 1908 for the first psychoanalytical congress, 
Dr. Jones delivered a short paper on “Rationalization in 
Everyday Life.” The contents of this paper hold good to 
this day: psychoanalysis was enriched by an important 
concept and an indispensable term. In his various 
responsibilities (such as professor in Toronto, physician 
in London, founder and teacher of a Branch Society, 
director of a Press, editor of a journal, head of a training 
institute) he has worked tirelessly for psychoanalysis, 
making its findings known and defending them. He 
wrote, among others, “Papers on Psycho-Analysis” and 
“Essays in Applied Psycho-Analysis.” Presently he is not 
only indisputably the leading figure among 
English-speaking analysts, but is also recognized as one 
of the foremost representatives of psychoanalysis as a 
whole, a mainstay for his friends and a hope for the 
future of psychoanalysis. 



1931D 21/251 

The expert opinion in the Halsmann case (1931). 

The expert opinion in the Halsmann Case is discussed. 
If it had been objectively demonstrated that Philipp 
Halsmann murdered his father, there would be some 
grounds for introducing the Oedipus complex to proride 
a motive for an otherwise unexplained deed. Since no 
such proof has been adduced, mention of the Oedipus 
complex has a misleading effect. The Opinion of the 
Innsbruck Faculty of Medicine seems inclined to attri- 
bute an effective Oedipus complex to Philipp Halsmann, 
but refrains from defining the measure of this effective- 
ness, since under the pressure of the accusation the 
necessary conditions for an unreserved disclosure on 
Philipp Halsmann’s part were not fulfilled. The possible 
influence of emotional shock on the disturbance of 
memory with regard to impressions before and during 
the critical time is minimized to the extreme, in Freud’s 
opinion unjustly. The assumptions of an exceptional 
state of mind or of mental illness are decisively rejected, 
but the explanation of a repression having taken place in 
Philipp Halsmann after the deed is readily allowed, in 
the opinion of the Innsbruck Faculty of Medicine. A 
repression of this kind, occurring out of the blue in an 
adult who gives no indication of a severe neurosis, the 
repression of an action which would certainly be more 
important than any debatable details of distance and the 
passage of time and which takes place in a normal state 
or one altered only by physical fatigue, would be a rarity 
of the first order. 

156 



o 

ERIC 



165 




1933 A 22/3 



1930C 21/254 

Introduction to the special psychopathology number of 
‘the medical review of reviews’ (1930). 

An introduction to the special psychopathology of 
the Medical Review of Reviews is presented. The 
popularity of the name of psychoanalysis in America 
signifies neither a friendly attitude to the thing itself nor 
any specially wide or deep knowledge of it. Although 
America possesses several excellent analysts and at least 
one authority, the contributions to our science from 
that vast country are exiguous and provide little that is 
new. Psychiatrists and neurologists make frequent use of 
psychoanalysis as a therapeutic method, but as a rule 
they show little interest in its scientific problems and its 
cultural significance. There is a general tendency in 
America to shorten study and preparation and to 
proceed as fast as possible to practical application. There 
is a preference, too, for studying a subject like psycho- 
analysis not from the original sources but from 
second-hand and often inferior accounts. 

1931C 21/256 

Introduction to Edoardo Weiss’s ‘Elements of Psycho- 
analysis’ (1931). 

An introduction to Edoardo Weiss’s Elements of 
Psychoanalysis in presented. All who know how to 
appreciate the seriousness of a scientific endeavor, how 
to value the honesty of an investigator who does not 
seek to belittle or deny the difficulties, and how to take 
pleasure in the skill of a teacher who brings light into 
darkness and order into chaos by his exposition, must 
form a high estimate of this book and share Freud’s 
hope that it will awaken among cultivated and learned 
circles in Italy a lasting interest in the young science of 
psychoanalysis. 

1930B 21/257 

Preface to ‘ten years of the Beilin psycho-analytic 
institute’ (1930). 

The preface to Ten Years of the Berlin Psycho- 
analytic Institute is presented. The Berlin Psychoanalytic 
Institute has three functions within the psychoanalytic 
movement. First, it endeavors to make psychoanalytic 
therapy accessible to the great multitude who suffer 
under their neuroses no less than the wealthy, but who 
are not in a position to meet the cost of their treatment. 
Secondly, it seeks to provide a center at which analysis 
can be taught theoretically and at which the experience 
of older analysts can be handed on to pupils who are 
anxious to learn. Third, it aims at perfecting psycho- 
analytic knowledge of neurotic illnesses and therapeutic 
technique by applying them and testing them under 
fresh conditions. Ten years ago, Dr. Max Eitingon 



created this institute from his own resources, and has 
since then maintained and directed it by his own efforts. 

1932B 21/258 

Preface to Hermann Nunberg’s ‘General theory of the 
neuroses on a psycho-analytic basis’ (1932). 

The preface to Hermann Nunberg’s General Theory 
of the Neuroses on a Psychoanalytic Basis is presented. 
This volume by Nunberg contains the most complete 
and conscientious presentation of a psychoanalytic 
therapy of neurotic processes at this time. Those who 
expect to have the relevant problems simplified and 
smoothed over will not find satisfaction in this work but 
those who prefer scientific thinking and can appreciate it 
or who can enjoy the beautiful diversity of mental 
happenings will value this work and study it assiduously. 

1931E 21/259 

Letter to the burgomaster of Pribor (1931). 

A letter to the mayor of Pribor (formerly Freiberg, 
Austria) is presented, in which he thanks the city for the 
celebration and the commemoration of the house of his 
birth with a plaque in his honor. Freud left Freiberg at 
the age of 3 and visited it when he was 16, during his 
school holidays, and never returned to it again. At 75, it 
is not easy for him to put himself back into those early 
times. But of one thing, Freud feels sure: deeply buried 
within him there still lives the happy child of Freiberg, 
the first-born son of a youthful mother, who received his 
first indelible impressions from this air, from this soil. 



VOL. XXII New Introductory Lectures on 
Psycho-Analysis and Other Works (1932-1936) 

1933 A 22/3 

New introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1933). 
Editor’s note (1964) and Preface. 

The New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis 
was published on December 6, 1932. The first lecture, 
on dreams, is a recapitulation of the dream section in the 
earlier series. The third, fourth, and fifth lectures (on the 
structure of the mind, on anxiety and the theory of the 
instincts and on female psychology) introduce entirely 
new material and theories and, at all events in the case of 
the third and fourth lectures, plunge into meta- 
psycho logical and theoretical discussions of a difficulty 
which had been studiously avoided 15 years earlier. The 
remaining three lectures deal with a number of miscel- 
laneous topics only indirectly re'ated to psychoanalysis 
and deal with them in what might almost be described as 
a popular manner. The Introductory Lectures on 
Psychoanalysis were delivered during the two Winter 



157 



t G£ 



0 



1933 A 22/7 



Terms of 1915 to 1916 and 1916 to 1917 in a lecture 
room of the Vienna Psychiatric Clinic before an 
audience gathered from all the Faculties of the Univer- 
sity. The new lectures were never delivered. They are 
continuations and supplements. These lectures are ad- 
dressed to the nonprofessional multitude of educated 
people to whom a benevolent, even though cautions in- 
terest in the characteristics and discoveries of psycho- 
analysis, is attributed. 

1933 A 22/7 

New introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1933). 
Lecture XXIX: Revision of the theory of dreams. 

A revision of the theory of dreams is presented. What 
has been called the dream is described as the text of the 
dream or the manifest dream and what we are looking 
for, is described as the latent dream thoughts. We have 
to transform the manifest dream into the latent one, and 
to explain how, in the dreamer’s mind, the latter has 
become the former. The patient makes associations to 
the separate portions of the manifest dream. The longer 
and more roundabout the chain of associations, the 
stronger the resistance. The dream is a compromise 
structure. It has a double function; on the one hand it is 
egosyntonic, since, by getting rid of the stimuli which are 
interfering with sleep, it serves the wish to sleep; on the 
other hand it allows a repressed instinctual impulse to 
obtain the satisfaction that is possible in these circum- 
stances, in the form of the hallucinated fulfillment of a 
wish. The whole process of forming a dream which is 
permitted by the sleeping ego is, however, subject to the 
condition of the censorship, which is exercised by the 
residue of the repression still in operation. Under the 
influence of the censorship the processes of condensa- 
tion and displacement subject the dream thoughts to 
distortion after which secondary revision provides the 
dream with a smooth facade. Dreams are divided into 
wishful dreams, anxiety dreams, and punishment 
dreams. Punishment dreams are fulfillment of wishes, 
though not of wishes of the instinctual impulses but of 
those of the critical, censoring, and punishing agency in 
the mind. 

1933 A 22/31 

New introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1933). 
Lecture XXX: Dreams and occultism. 

Dreams and occultism are discussed. Dreams have 
often been regarded as the gateway into the world of 
mysticism, and even today are themselves looked on by 
many people as an occult phenomenon. Psychoanalysis 
may throw a little light on events described as occult. 
Freud gained the impression from his patients that 
fortunetellers merely bring to expression the thoughts, 
and more especially the secret wishes, of those who are 
questioning the tellers. He concludes that we are 



therefore justified in analyzing these prophecies as 
though they were subjective products, phantasies or 
dreams of the people concerned. If there is such a thing 
as telepathy as a real process, we may suspect that, in 
spite of its being so hard to demonstrate, it is quite a 
common phenomenon. We are reminded of the frequent 
anxiety felt by children over the idea that their parents 
know all their thoughts without having to be told them, 
an exact counterpart and perhaps the source of the 
belief of adults in the omniscience of God. 

1933A 22/57 

New introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1933). 
Lecture XXXI: The dissection of the psychical person- 
ality. 

The dissection of the psychical personality is 
presented. Symptoms are derived from the repressed; 
they are, as it were, its representatives before the ego. 
The ego can take itself as an object, can treat itself like 
other objects, can observe itself, criticize itself, and be 
split. The superego, which takes over the power, 
function, and even the methods of the parental agency, 
is not merely its successor but actually the legitimate 
heir of its body. The basis of the process is called 
identification and follows from the Oedipus complex. 
The superego, the ego, and the id are the three realm?, 
regions, provinces, into which we divide an individual’s 
mental apparatus, and we shall be concerned with the 
relations between them. In addition to the id being 
unconscious, portions of the ego and superego are 
unconscious as well. The id is the dark, inaccessible part 
of our personality. The id knows no judgments of value: 
no good and evil, no morality. Instinctual cathexes 
seeking discharge is all there is in the id. The ego is that 
part of the id which is adapted for the reception of 
stimuli from the external world, for remembering these, 
for testing reality, for controlling motility, and for 
synthesizing and organizing its mental processes. The 
superego merges into the id; indeed, as heir to the 
Oedipus complex it has intimate relations with the id; it 
is more remote than the ego from the perceptual system. 
The id has intercourse with the external world only 
through the ego. The intention of psychoanalysis is to 
strengthen the ego, to make it more independent of the 
superego, to widen its field of perception and enlarge its 
organization, so that it can appropriate fresh portions of 
the id. Where id was, there ego shall be. 

1933 A 22/81 

New introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1933). 
Lecture XXXII: Anxiety and instinctual life. 

The earlier lecture (XXV) on anxiety is recapitulated. 
The ego produces anxiety as a signal announcing a 
situation of danger. The typical danger situations in life 
are loss of mother, loss of love, castration and superego 

158 



167 



1933A 22/158 



reproach. The signal anxiety is called forth when an 
emerging impulse is felt that would result in a danger 
situation. The signal anxiety results in repression and 
subsequently either symptom formation or reaction 
formation. Probably all of the danger situations are 
reminders of an earlier traumatic situation which con- 
sisted of a state of high excitation felt as unpleasure 
which could not be discharged. Earlier instinct theory is 
recapitulated preparatory to mentioning new discoveries 
in libido theory. There is a preambivalent oral incorpora- 
tive stage followed by an ambivalent oral sadistic stage. 
After these come the anal sadistic and anal retentive 
stage. The instinctual transformations in anal erotism 
are described: the feces-money-baby-penis equation 
modeled on the anal birth fantasy; the character traits of 
orderliness, parsimoniousness and obstinancy arise from 
anal erotism. There are 2 major classes of instincts, 
sexual and aggressive, and every impulse consists of a 
fusion of the 2. Masochism is derived from an uncon- 
scious sense of guilt which in turn comes from the 
aggressiveness towards one’s parents which is found in 
the formation of the superego. 

1933A 22/112 

New introductory lectures on psycho-analysis (1933). 
Lecture XXXIII: Femininity. 

Femininity is discussed. We approach the investiga- 
tion of the sexual development of women with two 
expectations. The first is that the constitution will not 
adapt itself to its function without a struggle. The 
second is that the decisive turning points will already 
have been prepared for or completed before puberty. In 
the phallic phases of girls, the clitoris is the leading 
erotogenic zone. With the change of femininity the 
clitoris should wholly or in part hand over its sensitivity, 
and at the same time its importance, to the vagina. For a 
girl, her first object must be her mother. But in the 
Oedipus situation the girl’s father has become her love 
object, and we expect that in the normal course of 
development she will find her way from this paternal 
object to her final choice of an object, both of which a 
boy retains. The girl turns away from her mother 
because of her realization that she does not possess a 
penis: the discovery that she is castrated can lead to 
neurosis, a masculinity complex, or normal femininity. 
Along with the abandonment of clitoral masturbation a 
certain amount of activity is renounced. Passivity now 
has the upper hand, and the girl’s turning to her father is 
accomplished principally with the help of passive in- 
stinctual impulses. With the transference of the wish for 
a penis baby on to her father, the girl has entered the 
situation of the Oedipus complex. A women’s identifica- 
tion with her mother allows us to distinguish two strata: 
the pre-Oedipus one which rests on her affectionate 



attachment to her mother and takes her as a model, and 
the later one from the Oedipus complex which seeks to 
get rid of her mother and take the mother’s place with 
her father. 

1933 A 22/136 

New Introductory lectures on psychoanalysis (1933). 
Lecture XXXIV: Explanations, applications and orienta- 
tions. 

Explanations and applications of psychoanalysis are 
presented. Whether a man is a homosexual or a 
necrophiliac, a hysteric suffering from anxiety, an 
obsessional neurotic cut off from society, or a raving 
lunatic, the Individual Psychologist of the Adlerian 
school will declare that the impelling motive of his 
condition is that he wishes to assert himself, to 
over compensate for his inferiority, to remain on top, to 
pass from the feminine to the masculine line. One of the 
first applications of psychoanalysis was to understand 
the opposition offered by the contemporaries because of 
the practice of psychoanalysis. The first purpose was to 
understand the disorders of the human mind. The 
application of psychoanalysis to education is discussed. 
The first task of education is to teach the child to 
control his instincts; but we have learned from analysis 
that suppression of instincts involves the risk of neurotic 
illness. Therefore education must find its way between 
gratification and frustration. Freud suggests that 
teachers would be helped to find this way through 
psychoanalytic training. Parallel with the efforts of 
analysts to influence education, other investigations are 
being made into the origin and prevention of delin- 
quency and crime. The therapeutic effectiveness of 
psychoanalysis remains cramped by a number of factors. 
In the case of children, the difficulties are the external 
ones connected with their relation to their parents. In 
the case of adults the difficulties arise in the first 
instance from two factors: the amount of psychical 
rigidity present and the form of the illness. Psycho- 
analysis began as a method of treatment. If it were 
without therapeutic value it would not have been 
discovered in connection with sick people and would not 
have gone on developing for more than 30 years. 

1933A 22/158 

New introductory lectures on psychoanalysis (1933). 
Lecture XXXV: The question of a ‘Weltanschauung’. 

The question of a Weltanschauung is discussed. A 
Weltanschauung is an intellectual construction which 
solves all the problems of our existence uniformly on the 
basis of one overriding hypothesis, which, accordingly, 
leaves no question unanswered and in which everything 
that interests us finds its fixed place. The religious 
Weltanschauung is determined by the situation of our 



K 



1532A 22/185 

childhood. The scientific spirit has begun to treat 
religion as a human affair and to submit it to a critical 
examination. While the different religions wrangle with 
one another as to which of them is in possession of the 
truth, our view is that the question of the truth of 
religious beliefs may be left altogether on one side. 
Religion is an attempt to master the sensory world in 
which we are situated by means of the wishful world 
which we have developed within us as a result of 
biological and psychological necessities. Psychoanalysis 
is incapable of creating a Weltanschauung of its own. It 
does not need one; it is a part of science and can adhere 
to the scientific Weltanschauung. Scientific thought is 
still very young among human beings; there are too 
many of the great problems which it has not yet been 
able to solve. A Weltanschauung erected upon science 
lias, apart from its emphasis on the real external world, 
mainly passive traits, such as submission to the truth and 
rejection of illusions. 

1932A 22/185 

The acquisition and control of fire (1932). 

The connection between fire and micturition, which 
is the central feature of this discussion of the myth of 
Prometheus, has long been familiar to Freud. The myth 
tells us that Prometheus, a culture hero who was still a 
god and who was perhaps originally himself a demiurge 
and a creator of men, brought fire to men, hidden in a 
hollow stick, after stealing it from the gods. Such an 
object is regarded as a penis symbol. As punishment, 
Prometheus was chained to a rock, and every day a 
vulture fed on his liver. In ancient times the liver was 
regarded as the seat of all passions and desires; hence a 
punishment like that of Prometheus was the right one 
for a criminal driven by instinct, who had committed an 
offense at the prompting of evil desires. The sexual 
organ of the male has two functions; and there are those 
to whom this association is an annoyance. When the 
penis is erect, urination is impossible; and conversely, 
when the organ is serving to evacuate urine (the water of 
the body) all its connections with the genital function 
seem to be quenched. The antithesis between the two 
functions might lead us to say that man quenches his 
own fire with his own water. 

1933B 22/197 

Why war? (1933). Editor's note (1964). 

The letters on war between Freud and Einstein were 
written in 1932. The two men were never at all intimate 
with each other and only met once, at the beginning of 
1927, in the house of Freud’s youngest son in Berlin. 
Freud had written on me subject of war before: in the 
first section of his paper “Thoughts for the Times on 
War and Death’’ produced soon after the beginning of 



• 

the first World War. Although some of the considera- 
tions discussed in the present paper appear in the earlier 
one, they are more closely related to the thoughts 
expressed in his recent writings on sociological subjects. 



1933B 22/199 

Why war? Letter from Einstein (1933). 

Einstein wrote a letter to Freud, dated July 20, 1932. 
With the advance of modem science, the issue of war has 
come to mean a matter of life or death for civilization as 
we know it; nevertheless, for all the zeal displayed, every 
attempt at its solution has ended in a lamentable 
breakdown. As one immune from nationalist bias, 
Einstein sees a simple way of dealing with the super- 
ficial, ( ie . , administrative) aspect of the problem: the 
setting up, by international consent, of a legislative and 
judicial body to settle every conflict arising between 
nations. Each nation would invoke this body’s decision 
in every dispute, accept its judgments unreservedly and 
carry out every measure the tribunal deems necessary for 
the execution of its decrees. However, a tribunal is a 
human institution which, when the power at its disposal 
is inadequate to enforce its verdicts, is all the more 
prone to suffer these to be deflected by extrajudicial 
pressure. The quest of international security involves the 
unconditional surrender by every nation, in a certain 
measure, of its liberty of action or its sovereignty. It is 
clear beyond all doubt that no other road can lead to 
such security. 

1933B 22/203 

Letter from Freud (1933). 

Freud wrote a letter to Einstein, dated September, 
1932. It is a general principle that conflicts of interest 
between men are settled by the use of violence. Right is 
the might of a community. A violent solution of 
conflicts of interest is not avoided even inside a 
community. Wars will only be prevented with certainty 
if mankind unites in setting up a central authority to 
which the right of giving judgment upon all conflicts of 
interest shall be handed over. There is no use in trying to 
get rid of men’s aggressive inclinations. For incalculable 
ages, mankind has been passing through a process of 
evolution of culture. The psychical modifications that go 
along with the process of civilization are striking and 
unambiguous. They consist in a progressive displacement 
of instinctual aims and a restriction of instinctual 
impulses. War is in the crassest opposition to the 
psychical attitude imposed on us by the process of 
civilization, and for that reason we are bound to rebel 
against it; we simply cannot any longer put up with it. 
Whatever fosters the growth of civilization works at the 
same time against war. 



169 



1931F 22/251 



«. 



1932C 22/219 

My contact with Josef Popper-Lynkeus (1932). 

Freud’s contact with Josef Popper-Lynkeus is 
presented. Freud’s explanation of dream distortion 
seemed new to him. He had nowhere found anything 
like it. Years later, he came across Josef Popper- 
Lynkeus’ book Phantasies of a Realist, a collection of 
stories first published, like the Interpretation of Dreams, 
in 1899. One of the stories contained in it bore the title 
of “Dreaming like Waking”, and it aroused Freud’s 
deepest interest. There was a description in it of a man 
who could boast that he had never dreamt anything 
nonsensical. In the case of this man, no dream distortion 
occurred. Popper allowed the man complete insight into 
the reasons for his peculiarity. Distortion was a com- 
promise, something in its very nature disingenuous, the 
product of a conflict between thought and feeling. 
Where a conflict of this kind was not present and 
repression was unnecessary, dreams could not be strange 
or senseless. The man who dreamed in a way no 
different from that in which he thought while awake was 
granted by Popper the very condition of internal 
harmony which, as a social reformer, he aimed at 
producing in the body politic. 



1933C 22/227 

Sandor Ferenczi (1933). 

Sandor Ferenczi was bom on July 16, 1873, and died 
on May 22, 1933. Since the days when he was led to 
Freud by his interest in psychoanalysis, still in its youth, 
they shared many things with each other. Ten years 
earlier, when the Internationale Zeitschrift dedicated a 
special number to Ferenczi on his fiftieth birthday, he 
had already published most of the works which have 
made all analysts into his pupils. But he was holding 
back his most brilliant and most fertile achievement. In 
1924, his Versuch einer Genitaltheorie appeared. This 
little book is a biological rather than a psychoanalytic 
study; it is an application of the attitudes and insights 
associated with psychoanalysis to the biology of the 
sexual processes and, beyond them, to organic life in 
general. As its governing thought it lays stress on the 
conservative nature of the instincts, which seek to 
reestablish every state of things that has been abandoned 
owing to an external interference. Symbols are recog- 
nized as evidence of ancient connections. Later, the need 
to cure and to help had become paramount in him. 
From unexhausted springs of emotion the conviction 
was held that one could effect far more with one’s 
patients if one gave them enough of the love which they 
had longed for as children. 



1935B 22/233 

The subtleties of a faulty action (1935). 

The subtleties of a faulty action are discussed. Freud 
was preparing a birthday present for a woman friend, a 
small engraved gem for insertion into a ring. It was fixed 
in the center of a piece of stout cardboard and on this, 
Freud wrote the following words: “Voucher for the 
supply by Messrs. L., jev/elers, of a gold ring — for the 
attached stone bearing an engraved ship with sail and 
oars.” But at the point where there is a gap, between 
“ring” and “for,” there stood a word which Freud was 
obliged to cross out since it was entirely irrelevant. It 
was the little German word “bis,” meaning “until”-and 
meaning “twice” or “for a second time” in Latin. At 
first, Freud was pacified with the explanation that he 
objected-unconsciously-to using “for” twice in the 
same sentence, until his daughter reminded him that he 
had given his friend a similar stone for a ring on a pre- 
vious occasion. The objection, therefore, was to a repe- 
tition of the same present, the ring, not of the same 
word, “for.” There had been a displacement on to 
something trivial with the object of diverting attention 
from something more important: an esthetic difficulty, 
perhaps, in place of an instinctual conflict. 

1936A 22/239 

A disturbance of memory on the Acropolis (1936). 

An open letter to Romain Rolland on the occasion of 
his seventieth birthday is presented. When Freud stood 
on the Acropolis and cast his eyes around upon the 
landscape, a surprising thought entered his mind: “So all 
this really does exist, just as we learned at school!” The 
whole psychical situation, which seemed so confused 
and is so difficult to describe, can be satisfactorily 
cleared up by assuming ?nat at the time Freud had a 
momentary feeling: “What I see here is not real.” Such a 
feeling is known as a feeling of derealization. These 
derealizations are remarkable phenomena which are still 
little understood. They are spoken of as sensations, but 
they are obviously complicated processes, attached to 
particular mental contents and bound up with decisions 
made about those contents. There are two general char- 
acteristics of the phenomena of derealization. The first 
is that they all serve the purpose of defense; they aim at 
keeping something away from the ego, at disavowing it 
The second is their dependence upon the past, upon the 
ego’s store of memories and upon earlier distressing 
experiences which have since, perhaps, fallen victim to 
repression. 

193 IF 22/251 

Letter to Georg Fuchs (1931). 

In reply io a request by Georg Fuchs, asking Freud to 
indorse his book Wir Zuchthausler (We Convicts), Freud 



161 

170 



1936B 22/253 



O 

ERIC 



stated that he could not subscribe to the assertion that 
the treatment of convicted prisoners is a disgrace to our 
civilization. On the contrary, it seems to be in perfect 
harmony with our civilization, a necessary expression of 
the brutality and lack of understanding which dominate 
contemporary civilized humanity. 

1936B 22/253 

Preface to Richard Sterba’s ‘Dictionary of psycho- 
analysis’ (1936). 

Freud wrote a preface to Richard Sterba’s Dictionary 
of Psychoanalysis. The Dictionary gives the impression 
of being a valuable aid to learners and of being a fine 
achievement on its own account. The precision and 
correctness of the individual entries is in fact of 
commendable excellence. English and French transla- 
tions of the headings are not indispensable but would 
add further to the value of the work. 

1933D 22/254 

Preface to Marie Bonaparte’s ‘The life and works of 
Edgar Allan Poe: A psycho-analytic interpretation’ 
(1933). 

Freud wrote a preface to Marie Bonaparte’s The Life 
and Works of Edgar Allan Poe: A Psychoanalytic 
Interpretation. Thanks to her interpretative efforts, we 
can now understand how much of the characteristics of 
Poe’s work were determined by their author’s special 
nature; but we also learn that this was itself the 
precipitate of powerful emotional ties and painful 
experiences in his early youth. 

1935C 22/255 

To Thomas Mann on his sixtieth birthday (1935). 

In Freud’s letter to Thomas Mann on his sixtieth 
birthday he wrote that wishing is cheap and strikes him 
as a relapse to the days when people believed in the 
magical omnipotence of thoughts. In the name of a 
countless number of Mann’s contemporaries, Freud 
expressed their confidence that Mann will never do or 
say anything that is cowardly or base, for an author’s 
words are deeds. 

VOL. XXIII Moses and Monotheism, 

An Outline of Psycho-Analysis and 
Other Works (1937-1939) » 

1939 A 23/3 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Editor’s 
note (1964) and a note on the transcription of proper 
names. 

Moses and Monotheism consists of three essays cf greatly 
differing length, two prefaces, both situated at the begin- 



ning of the third essay, and a third preface situated 
halfway through that same essay. The book took 4 or 
more years for completion, during which it was being 
constantly revised. There were acute external difficulties 
in the final phase which consisted of a succession of 
political disorders in Austria culminating in the Nazi 
occupation of Vienna and Freud’s enforced migration to 
England. The whole work is to be regarded as a 
continuation of Freud’s earlier studies of the origins of 
human social organization in Totem and Taboo and 
Group Psychology. 

1939A 23/7 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay I. 
Moses ar> Egyptian. 

The man Moses, who set the Jewish people free, who 
gave them their laws and founded their religion, dates 
from such remote times (thirteenth or fourteenth 
century B.C.) that we cannot evade a preliminary 
enquiry as to whether he was a historical personage or a 
creature of legend. The name, Moses, was Egyptian, 
coming from the Egyptian word “mose” meaning 
“child.” The recognition that the name of Moses is 
Egyptian has not been considered decisive evidence of 
his origin, and no further conclusions have been drawn 
from it. In 1909 Otto Rank published the book The 
Myth of the Birth of the Hero which points out that 
almost all the prominent civilized nations began at an 
early stage to glorify their heros and invest the birth of 
these heroes with phantastic features. An average legend 
brings into prominence the following essential features: 
the hero is the child of the most aristocratic parents; his 
conception is preceded by difficulties; the newborn child 
is condemned to death or to exposure, usually by the 
orders of his father or of someone representing him; as a 
rule he is given over to the water in a casket; he is 
afterwards rescued; after he has grown up, he rediscovers 
his aristocratic parents and takes his revenge on his 
father. The two families in the myth of Moses (the 
aristocratic and the humble family) are both reflections 
of the child’s own family as they appeared to him in 
successive periods of his life. In every instance which it 
has been possible to test, the first family, the one from 
which the child was exposed, was the invented one, and 
the second one, in which he was received and grew up, 
was the real one. Thus it is concluded that Moses was an 
Egyptian, probably an aristocrat, whom the legend 
turned into a Jew. The deviation of the legend of Moses 
from all the others of its kind can be traced back to a 
special feature of his history. Whereas normally a hero 
rises above his humble beginnings, the heroic life of the 
man Moses began with his stepping down from his 
exalted position and descending to the level of the 
Children of Israel. 



162 

171 



1939 A 23/17 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Eassay II. 
If Moses was an Egyptian: Part I. If Moses was an 
Egyptian. Part 2. Moses introduced an exclusive religion. 

The idea of Moses as an Egyptian is discussed. It was 
Freud’s hope that the hypothesis that Moses was an 
Egyptian would turn out to be fruitful and illuminating; 
however, the first conclusion to be drawn from that 
hypothesis, that the new religion which he gave to the 
Jews was his own Egyptian one, has been invalidated by 
the realization of the different and contradictory charac- 
ter ofihe two religions. It remains possible that the religion 
which Moses gave to his Jewish people was nevertheless 
his own, that it was an Egyptian religion, Aten, though 
not the Egyptian religion. The Aten religion excludes 
everything to do with myths, magic and sorcery. The sun 
god was no longer represented by a small pyramid and a 
falcon, but by a round disk with rays proceeding from it, 
which end in human hands. In spite of all the exuberant 
art of the Amarna period, no other representation of the 
sun god has been found. There was complete silence 
about the god of the dead, Osiris, and the kingdom of 
the dead. 

1939A 23/24 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay II. If 
Moses was an Egyptian. Part 3. Comparison of Jewish 
and Aten religions. 

If Moses were an Egyptian and if he communicated 
his own religion to the Jews, it must have been 
Akhenaten’s, the Aten religion. The similarities as well as 
the differences between the two religions are easily 
discernible. Both of them were forms of a strict 
monotheism. Jewish monotheism was in some respects 
even more harsh than the Egyptian. The most essential 
difference is that the Jewish religion was entirely 
without sun worship. Moses did not only give th/e Jews a 
new religion; he also introduced the custom of circum- 
cision. Freud concludes that if Moses gave the Jews not 
only a new religion but also the commandment for 
circumcision, he was not a Jew but an Egyptian, and in 
that case the Mosaic religion was probably an Egyptian 
one and, in view of its contrast to the popular religion, 
the religion of the Aten, with which the later Jewish 
religion agrees in some remarkable respects. According 
to Freud’s construction, the Exodus from Egypt occur- 
red during the period between 1358 and 1350 B.C., after 
Akhenaten’s death and before Haremhab’s reestablish- 
ment of state authority. If it were admitted that 
circumcision was an Egyptian custom introduced by 
Moses, that would be almost admitting that the religion 
delivered to them by Moses was an Egyptian one too. 
There were good reasons for denying that fact, so the 
truth about circumcision must also be contradicted. 



1939A 23/30 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay II. If 
Moses was an Egyptian. Part 4. Two gods and two 
Moses. 

The Jews possess a copious literature apart from the 
Bible, including the legends and myths which grew up in 
the course of centuries round the imposing figure of 
their first leader and the founder of their religion. 
Scattered in this material there may be fragments of 
trustworthy tradition for which no room was found in 
the Pentateuch. A legend of this sort gives an engaging 
account of how the ambition of the man Moses found 
expression even in his childhood. Moses is said to have 
been slow of speech. This may suggest that Moses spoke 
another language and could not communicate with his 
Semitic neo-Egyptians without an interpreter. Modern 
historians agree that the Jewish tribes, which later 
developed into the people of Israel, took on a new 
religion at a certain point of time. But in their view this 
did not take place in Egypt or at the foot of a mountain 
in the Sinai Peninsula, but in a certain locality known as 
Meribah-Kadesh, an oasis distinguished by its wealth of 
springs and wells in the stretch of country south of 
Palestine, between the eastern exit from the Sinai 
Peninsula and the western border of Arabia. There they 
took over the worship of a god Yahweh, a volcano god. 
According to Meyer, the mediator between God and the 
people in the founding of this religion was named Moses. 
He was the son-in-law of the Midianite priest Jethro, and 
was keeping his flocks when he received the summons 
from God. 

1939A 23/36 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay II. If 
Moses was an Egyptian. Part 5. 

Efforts to see in Moses a figure that goes beyond the 
priest of Kadesh, and to confirm the grandeur with 
which tradition glorifies him, have not ceased ever since 
Eduard Meyer. In 1922, Ernst Sellin found in the 
Prophet Hosea unmistakable signs of a tradition that 
Moses, the founder of their religion, met with a violent 
end in a rising of his refractory and stiff-necked people, 
and that at the same time the religion he had introduced 
was thrown off. One of the greatest enigmas of Jewish 
prehistory is that of the origin of the Levites. They are 
traced back to 1 of the 12 tribes of Israel, that of Levi, 
but no tradition has ventured to say where that tribe was 
originally located to what portion of the conquered land 
of Canaan was allotted to it. It is incredible that a great 
lord, like Moses the Egyptian, should have joined this 
alien people unaccompanied. He certainly must have 
brought a retinue with him. This is who the Levites 
originally were. The Levites were the followers of Moses. 
It is hypothesized that 2 generations or even a century 



163 



o 



172 



1939A 23/41 



elapsed between the fall of Moses and the establishment 
of the new religion at Kadesh. The retention of 
circumcision is evidence that the founding of the religion 
at Kadesh involved a compromise. Moses was transferred 
to Kadesh or to Sinai-Horeb and put in the place of the 
Midianite priests. Yahweh, who lived on a mountain in 
Midian, was allowed to extend over into Egypt, and in 
exchange for this, the existence and activity of Moses 
were extended to Kadesh and as far as the country east 
of the Jordan. Thus he was fused with the figure of the 
later religious founder (the son-in-law of the Midianite 
Jethro) and lent him his name of Moses. Of this second 
Moses we can give no personal account except to pick 
out the contradictions in the Biblical description of the 
character of Moses. Freud concludes that the Egyptian 
Moses was never at Kadesh and had never heard the 
name of Yahweh, and the Midianite Moses had never 
been in Egypt and knew notliing of Aten. In order to 
fuse the two figures together, tradition or legend had the 
task of bringing the Egyptian Moses to Midian. 



1939A 23/41 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay 
II. If Moses was an Egyptian. Part 6. One hundred 
years of history suppressed. 

With the setting up of the new god, Yahweh, at 
Kadesh, it became necessary to do something to glorify 
him. It became necessary to fit him in, to make room for 
him, to wipe out the traces of earlier religions. The man 
Moses was dealt with by shifting him to Midian and 
Kadesh, and by fusing him with the priest of Yahweh 
who founded the religion. Circumcision, the most 
suspicious indication of dependence on Egypt, was 
retained but no attempts were spared to detach the 
custom from Egypt. The patriots were brought into the 
Biblical stories for two reasons: 1) to acknowledge that 
Yahweh was worshipped by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, 
although not under that name; and 2) to link their 
memory with particular localities in Canaan. Freud 
concluded that between the Exodus from Egypt and the 
fixing of the text of the Bible under Ezra and Nehemiah 
some 800 years elapsed. The form of the Yahweh 
religion changed to conform with the original religion of 
Moses. 

1939A 23/47 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay II. If 
Moses was an Egyptian. Part 7. The murder of Moses. 

The murder of Moses, discovered by Sellin from hints 
in the writings of the Prophets, is discussed. Moses 
commanded and forced his faith upon the people, thus 
forcing the Semites to rid themselves of him. The 



account of “wandering in the wilderness” described in 
the Bible depicts a succession of serious revolts against 
his authority. The people began to regret and sought to 
forget the murder of Moses. When the Exodus and the 
foundation of the religion at the oasis of Kadesh were 
brought closer together, and Moses was represented as 
being concerned in the latter instead of the other man 
(the Midianite priest), not only were the demands of the 
followers of Moses satisfied but his violent end was 
successfully disavowed. The chronological relations of 
these events are discussed. Freud concludes that Jewish 
history is familiar for its dualities: two groups of people 
who came together to form the nation, two kingdoms 
into which this nation fell apart, two gods’ names in the 
documentary source of the Bible. To these, Freud adds 
two fresh ones: the foundation of two religions, the first 
repressed by the second but nevertheless emerging 
victoriously behind it, and two religious founders, who 
are both called by the same name of Moses and whose 
personalities we have to distinguish from each other. All 
of these dualities are the necessary consequences of the 
first one: one portion of the people had an experience 
which must be regarded as traumatic and which the 
other portion escaped. 



I939A 23/54 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay III. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion: Part I. 
Prefatory Notes I (Vienna) & II (London). 

Two prefatory notes to Moses, His People and 
Monotheist Religion, are presented. Freud proposes to 
add a final portion to his two essays on Moses in Imago. 
Psychoanalytic research such as this is viewed with 
suspicious attention by Catholicism. If psychoanalytic 
work leads to a conclusion which reduces religion to a 
neurosis of humanity and explains its enormous power 
in the same way as a neurotic compulsion, we may be 
sure of drawing the resentment of our ruling powers 
down upon us. Freud does not intend these essays for 
public display or to cause sensationalism. He predicts 
that sometime in the future they may be read and 
evaluated without bias. The first prefatory note was 
written in Vienna, the second in London. When Ger- 
many invated Austria, Freud escaped to London where 
he felt relatively free to publish his views on Moses. 
Since Freud wrote Totem and Taboo he never doubted 
that religious phenomena are only to be understood on 
the pattern of the individual neurotic symptoms familiar 
to him. Freud concludes that if he could not find 
support in an analytic interpretation of the exposure 
myth and could not pass from there to Sellin’s suspicion 
about the end of Moses, the whole thing would have had 
to remain unwritten. 



164 



o 

FRIC 



173 



1939 A 



23/80 



1939 A 23/59 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay 111. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part 11. 
Summary and recapitulation. 

The historical premise concerning Moses and the 
Jewish religion is presented. The idea arose of a universal 
god Aten who is no longer restricted to a single country 
and a single people. Amenophis the Fourth, a Pharaoh, 
promoted the religion of Aten into a state religion. 
Under Akhenaten’s feeble successors, all that he had 
created collapsed. Among those in Akhenaten’s en- 
tourage there was a man who was called perhaps 
Tuthmosis. He was in a high position and a convinced 
adherent of the Aten religion, but in contrast to the 
meditative king, he was energetic and passionate. He 
turned to a Semitic tribe, foreigners, and with them 
sought compensation for his losses. He chose them as his 
people and tried to realize his ideals in them. After he 
had left Egypt with them, accompanied by his followers, 
he made them holy by the mark of circumcision, gave 
them laws and > 'troduced them into the doctrines of the 
Aten religion. The union and founding of the religion at 
Kadesh were accompanied by a compromise in which 
the two sides are distinguishable. The one partner was 
only concerned to disavow the novelty and foreign 
character of the god Yahweh and to increase his claim to 
the people’s devotion; the other partner was anxious not 
to sacrifice to him precious memories of the liberation 
from Egypt and of the grand figure of the leader, Moses. 

1 939 A 23/66 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay 111. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part I. B. The 
latency period and tradition. 

The idea of a single god, as well as the rejection of 
magically effective ceremonial and the stress upon 
ethical demands made in his name were in fact Mosaic 
doctrines, to which no attention was paid to begin with, 
but which, after a long interval had elapsed, came into 
operation and became permanently established . The two 
portions of what was later to be the Jewish people came 
together at Kadesh to receive a new religion. In those 
who had been in Egypt , the memories of the Exodus and 
of the figure of Moses were still so strong and vivid that 
they demanded their inclusion in an account of early 
times. The determining purpose of the other portion of 
the people was to glorify the new god and to dispute his 
being foreign. The phenomenon of latency in the history 
of the Jewish religion may be explained by the circum- 
stance that the facts and ideas which were intentionally 
disavowed by the official historians were in fact never 
lost. Information about them persisted in traditions 
which survived among the people. These traditions, 
instead of becoming weaker with time, became more and 



more powerful in the course of centuries, forced their 
way into the later revisions of the official accounts, and 
finally showed themselves strong enough to have a 
decisive influence on the thoughts and actions of the 
people. The Jewish people had abandoned the Aten 
religion brought to them by Moses and had turned to the 
worship of another god who differed little from the 
Baalim of the neighboring peoples. The formation of 
epics pertaining to the Jewish culture is discussed. 

1939 A 23/72 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay 111. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part I. C. The 
analogy. 

The only satisfying analogy to the remarkable course 
of events that we have found in the history of the Jewish 
religion lies in the genesis of human neuroses. We give 
the name of traumas to those impressions, experienced 
early and later forgotten, to which we attach such great 
importance in the etiology of the neuroses. Researches 
have shown that the phenomena (symptoms) of a 
neurosis are the result of certain experiences and 
impressions which for that very reason are regarded as 
etiological traumas. All these traumas occur in early 
childhood up to about the fifth year. The experiences in 
question are as a rule totally forgotten. They relate to 
impressions of a sexual and aggressive nature. The effects 
of traumas are of two kinds, positive and negative. All 
these phenomena, the symptoms as well as the restric- 
tions on the ego and the stable character changes, have a 
compulsive quality: that is to say that they have great 
psychical intensity and at the same time exhibit a far 
reaching independence of the organization of the other 
mental processes, which are adjusted to the demands of 
the real external world and obey the laws of logical 
thinking. A trauma in childhood may be followed 
immediately by a neurotic outbreak, an infantile neuro- 
sis, with an abundance of efforts at defense, and 
accompanied by the formation of symptoms. The 
phenomenon of a latency of the neurosis between the 
first reactions to the trauma and the later outbreak of 
the illness must be regarded as typical. 

1939A 23/80 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay 111. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part 1. D. 
Application. 

Freud’s construction of early history asserts that in 
primeval times, primitive man lived in small groups, each 
under the domination of a powerful male. The lot of his 
sons was a hard one: if they roused their father’s 
jealousy they were killed, castrated, or driven out. Their 
only resource was to collect together in small commun- 
ities, to get themselves wives by robbery, and, when one 
or other of them could succeed in it, to raise themselves 

165 



r' 



O 



174 



4 



1939A 23/92 



into a position similar to their father’s in the primal 
group. Totemism is regarded as the first form in which 
religion was manifested in human history. The first step 
away from totemism was the humanizing of the being 
who was worshipped. The reestablishment of the primal 
father in his historic rights was a great step forward but 
it could not be the end. The killing of Moses by his 
Jewish people, recognized by Sellin from the trace of it 
in tradition becomes an indispensable part of Freud’s 
construction, an important link between the forgotten 
event of primeval times and its later emergence in the 
form of the monotheist religions. It is plausible to 
conjecture that remorse for the murder of Moses 
provided the stimulus for the wishful phantasy of the 
Messiah who was to return and lead his people to 
redemption and the promised world dominion. Some 
deep motives for hatred of the Jews are analysed and 
include: jealousy of those people who declare themselves 
the firstborn, favorite children of God and their practice 
of circumcision which recalls castration. 

1939A 23/92 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay III. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part I. E. 
Difficulties. 

In the transference from individual to group psychol- 
ogy, two difficulties arise, differing in their nature and 
importance. The first of these is that we have dealt with 
only a single instance from the copious phenomenology 
of religions and have thrown no light on any others. The 
second difficulty raises the question in what form the 
operative tradition in the life of peoples is present. The 
compromise at Kadesh has been attributed to the 
survival of a powerful tradition among those who had 
returned from Egypt. In the group an impression of the 
past is retained in unconscious memory traces. If we 
assume the survival of memory traces in the archaic 
heritage, we have bridged the gulf between individual 
and group psychology: we can deal with peoples as we 
do with an individual neurotic. A tradition that was 
based only on communication could not lead to the 
compulsive character that attaches to religious phe- 
nomena. It would be listened to, judged, and perhaps 
dismissed, like any other piece of information from 
outside; it would never attain the privilege of being 
liberated from the constraint of logical thought. 

1939A 23/103 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay III. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part II. 
Summary and recapitulation. 

A summary and recapitulation of Moses and Mono- 
theism is presented. Two pieces were published in 
Imago: the psychoanalytic starting point of the whole 
thing “Moses an Egyptian”, and the historical construc- 



tion erected on this “If Moses was an Egyptian”. The 
remainder, which included what was really open to 
objection and dangerous, the application of the findings 
to the genesis of monotheism and the view of religion in 
general, Freud held back. In March 1938, came the 
unexpected German invasion of Vienna, which forced 
him to leave his home but also freed him from his 
anxiety lest his publication might conjure up a prohibi- 
tion of psychoanalysis in a place where it was still 
tolerated. 

1939 A 23/105 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay III. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part II. A. 
The people of Israel. 

Of all the peoples who lived round the basin of the 
Mediterranean in antiquity, the Jewish people is almost 
the only one which still exists in name and also in 
substance. It has met misfortunes and ill treatment with 
an unexampled capacity for resistance; it has developed 
special character traits and has earned the hearty dislike 
of every other people. We may start from a character 
trait of the Jews which dominates their relation to 
others. There is no doubt that they have a particularly 
high opinion of themselves, that they regard themselves 
as more distinguished, of higher standing, as superior to 
other people. At the same time they are inspired by a 
peculiar confidence in life, such as is derived from the 
secret ownership of some precious possession, a kind of 
optimism: pious people would call it trust in God. They 
really regard themselves as God’s chosen people, they 
believe that they stand especially close to him; and this 
makes them proud and confident. If one is the declared 
favorite of the dreaded father, one need not be surprised 
at the jealousy of one’s brothers and sisters. The course 
of world history seemed to justify the presumption of 
the Jews, since, when later on it pleased God to send 
mankind a Messiah and redeemer, he once again chose 
him from the Jewish people. It was the man Moses who 
imprinted this trait upon the Jewish people. He raised 
their self-esteem by assuring them that they were God’s 
chosen people, he enjoined them to holiness and pledged 
them to be apart from others. 

1939 A 23/107 

Moses ri'id monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay III. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part II. B. 
The great man. 

If the investigation of a particular case demonstrates 
to us the transcendent influence of a single personality, 
our conscience need not reproach us with having, by this 
hypothesis, flown in the face of the doctrine of the 
importance of general and impersonal factors. The 
development of monotheism was linked with the estab- 
lishment of closer relations between different nations 

166 



o 

ERIC 



175 



1939A 23/122 



and with the building up of a great empire. A great man 
influences his fellow men in two ways: by his person* 
ality and by the idea which he puts forward. In the mass 
of mankind there is a powerful need for an authority 
who can be admired, before whom one bows down, by 
whom one is ruled and perhaps even ill treated. The 
origin of this is a longing for the father felt by everyone 
from his childhood onwards, for the same father whom 
the hero of legend boasts he has overcome. There is no 
doubt that it was a mighty prototype of a father which, 
in the person of Moses, stooped to the poor Jewish 
bondsmen to assure them that they were his dear 
children. And no less overwhelming must have been the 
effect upon them of the idea of a single, eternal, 
almighty God, who made a covenant with them and who 
promised to care for them if they remained loyal to his 
worship. The great religious idea for which the man 
Moses stood out was not his own property: he had taken 
it over from King Akhenaten. 



1939 A 23/111 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay 111. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part II. C. 
The advance in intellectuality. 

In order to bring about lasting psychical results in a 
people, it is clearly not enough to assure them that they 
have been chosen by the diety. The fact must also b' 
proved to them in some way if they are to believe it and 
to draw consequences from the belief. In the religion of 
Moses, the Exodus from Egypt served as the proof; God, 
or Moses in his name, was never tired of appealing to this 
evidence of favor. The feat of the Passover was intro- 
duced in order tc maintain the memory of that event. 
The religion of Moses brought the Jews a grand 
conception of God. Anyone who belived in this God had 
some kind of share in his greatness, might feel exalted 
himself. Among the precepts of the Mosaic religion there 
is one that is of the greatest importance. This is the 
prohibition against making an image of God, the 
compulsion to worship a God whom one cannot see. The 
Mosaic prohibition elevated God to a higher degree of 
intellectuality. All advances in intellectuality have « as 
their consequence that the individual’s self-esteem is 
increased, that he is made proud, so that he feels 
superior to other people who have remained under the 
spell of sensuality. Moses conveyed to the Jews an 
exalted sense of being a chosen people. The dematerial- 
ization of God brought a fresh and valuable contribution 
to their secret treasure. The Jews retained their inclina- 
tion to intellectual interests. 



1939 A 23/116 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay HI. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part II. D. 
Renunciation of instinct. 

It is not obvious and not immediately understandable 
why an advance in intellectuality, a setback to sensu- 
ality, should raise the self-regard both of an individual 
and of a people. It seems to presuppose the existence of 
a definite standard of value and of some other person or 
agency which maintains it. If the id in a human being 
gives rise to an instinctual demand of an erotic or 
aggressive nature, the simplest and most natural thing is 
that the ego, which has the apparatus of thought and the 
muscular apparatus at its disposal, should satisfy the 
demand by an action. This satisfaction of the instinct is 
felt by the ego as pleasure. Instinctual renunciation can 
be imposed for both internal and external reasons. The 
religion which began with the prohibition against making 
an image of god develops more and more in the course 
of centuries into a religion of instinctual renunciations; 
it is content with a marked restriction of sexual 
freedom. God, however, becomes entirely removed from 
sexuality and elevated into the ideal of ethical perfec- 
tion. Moses made his people holy by introducing the 
custom of circumcision. Circumcision is the symbolic 
substitute for the castration which the primal father 
once inflicted upon his sons in the plenitude of his 
absolute power, and whoever accepted that symbol was 
showing by it that he was prepared to submit to the 
father’s will, even if it imposed the most painful sacrifice 
on him. A part of the precepts of ethics is justified 
rationally by the necessity for delimiting the rights of 
the individual with respect to society and those of 
individuals with respect to one another. 

1939A 23/122 

Moses and monotheism; Three essays ( 1939). Essay 111. 
Moses, his people, and monotheist religion. Part II. E. 
What is true in religion. 

The man Moses impressed the special character of the 
Jewish people on them by giving them a religion which 
increased their self-esteem so much that they thought 
themselves superior to all ether peoples. Thereafter they 
survived by keeping apart from others. Mixtures of 
blood interfered little with this, since what held them 
together was an ideal factor, the possession in common 
of certain intellectual and emotional wealth. The religion 
of Moses led to this result because: (1) it allowed the 
people to take a share in the grandeur of a new idea of 
God; (2) it asserted that this people had been chosen by 
this great God and were destined to receive evidences of 
his special favor; and (3) it forced upon the people an 
advance in intellectuality which, important enough in 
itself, opened the way, in addition, to the appreciation 
of intellectual work and to further renunciations of 



167 



o 

ERIC 



455*582 0 - 72 - 12 



176 



1939A 23/124 



O 

ERIC 



instinct. The religion of Moses did not disappear without 
leaving a trace. A kind of memory of it had survived, 
obscured and distorted, supported, perhaps, among 
individual members of the priestly caste by ancient 
records. It was this tradition of a great past which 
continued to work in the background, as it were, which 
gradually gained more and more power over men’s 
minds, and which finally succeeded in transforming the 
god Yahweh into the god of Moses and in calling back to 
life the religion of Moses which had been established and 
then abandoned long centuries earlier. 

1939 A 23/124 

Moses and monotheism: Three essays (1939). Essay III. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part II. F. 
The return of the repressed. 

The experiences of a person’s first 5 years exercise a 
determining effect on his life, which nothing later can 
withstand. What children have experienced at the age of 
2 and have not understood, need never be remembered 
by them except in dreams. But at some later time it will 
break into their life with obsessional impulses, it will 
govern their actions, it will decide their sympathies and 
antipathies and will quite often determine their choice 
of a love object. It is not easy to introduce the idea of 
the unconscious into group psychology. Regular contri- 
butions are made to these phenomena by the mecha- 
nisms which lead to the formation jf neuroses. Here 
again the determining events occur in early childhood, 
but here the stress is not upon the time but upon the 
process by which the event is met, the reaction to it. It is 
described schematically: as a result of the experience, an 
instinctual demand arises which calls for satisfaction. 
The ego refuses that satisfaction, either because it is 
paralyzed by the magnitude of the demand or because it 
recognizes it as a danger. The ego fends off the danger 
by the process of repression. The instinctual impulse is 
in some way inhibited and its precipitating cause, with 
its attendant perceptions and ideas, is forgotten. The 
formation of symptoms may be described as the return 
of the repressed. Their distinguishing characteristic is the 
greater distortion to which the returning material has 
been subjected as compared with the original. 

1939A 23/127 

Moses and monotheism: three essays (1939). Essay III. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part II. G. 
Historical truth. 

The religion of Moses only carried through its effect 
on the Jewish people as a tradition. A primitive man is in 
need of a god as creator of the universe, as chief of his 
clan, as personal protector. This god takes his position 
behind the dead fathers about whom tradition still has 
something to say. The idea of a single god means in itself 
an advance in intellectuality. When Moses brought the 



people the idea of a single god, it was not a novelty but 
signified the revival of an experience in the primeval ages 
of the human family which had long vanished from 
men’s conscious memory. We have learned from the 
psychoanalyses of individuals that their earliest impres- 
sions, received at a time when the child was scarcely yet 
capable of speaking, produce at some time or another 
effects of a compulsive character without themselves 
being consciously remembered. The same assumption is 
made about the earliest experiences of the whole of 
humanity. One of these effects would be the emergence 
of the idea of a single great god, an idea which must be 
recognized as a completely justified memory, though, it 
is true, one that has been distorted. An idea such as this 
has a compulsive character: it must be believed. Since it 
is distorted, it may be described as a delusion; insofar as 
it brings a return of the past, it must be called the truth. 

1939A 23/132 

Moses and monotheism: three essays (1939). Essay III. 
Moses, his people and monotheist religion. Part II. H. 
The historical development. 

After the institution of the combination of brother 
clan, matriarchy, exogamy, and totemism, a develop- 
ment began which must be described as a slow return of 
the repressed. The return of the repressed took place 
under the influence of all the changes in conditions of 
life which fill the history of human civilization. The first 
effect of meeting the being who had so long been missed 
and longed for was overwhelming and was like the 
traditional description of the law giving from Mount 
Sinai. Admiration, awe and thankfulness for having 
found grace in his eyes, were part of the positive feelings 
towards the father god. A rapture of devotion to God 
was the first reaction to the return of the great father. 
There was no place in the framework of the religion of 
Moses for a direct expression of the murderous hatred of 
the father. All that could come to light was a mighty 
reaction against it, a sense of guilt on account of that 
hostility, a bad conscience for having sinned against God 
and for not ceasing to sin. Further development of this 
point takes us beyond Judaism. Original sin and redemp- 
tion by the sacrifice of a victim became the foundation 
stones of the new religion founded by Paul. Christianity, 
having arisen out of a father religion, became a son 
religion but has not escaped the fate of having to get rid 
of the father. Only a portion of the Jewish people 
accepted the new doctrine. Those who refused to are 
still called Jews today. 

1940A 23/141 

An outline of psychoanalysis (1940). Editor’s note 
(1964) and Preface. 

An Outline of Psychoanalysis was first published both 
in German and English. The Outline must be described as 



168 

177 



1940 A 23/152 



unfinished, but it is difficult to regard it as incomplete. 
The last chapter is shorter than the rest and might have 
gone on to a discussion of such things as the sense of 
guilt, though this had already been touched on in 
Chapter 6. In general, however, the question of how far 
and in what direction Freud would have proceeded with 
the book is an intriguing one, for the program laid down 
by the author in his preface seems already to be 
reasonably well carried out. In the long succession of 
Freud’s expository works the Outline exhibits a unique 
character. The others are, without exception, aimed at 
explaining psychoanalysis to an outside public, a public 
with varying degrees and types of general approach to 
Freud’s subject, but always a relatively ignorant public. 
This cannot be said of the Outline. .This is not a book for 
beginners; it is something much more like a refresher 
course for advanced students. 



1940A 23/144 

An outline of psychoanalysis (1940). Part I. The mind 
and its workings. Chapter I: The psychical apparatus. 

The id, the oldest of the psychic agencies, contains 
everything that is inherited, that is present at birth, that 
is laid down in the constitution, therefore, instincts. 
Under the influence of the real external world, one 
portion of the id has undergone a special development: 
from what was originally a cortical layer, a special 
organization (called the ego) has arisen which acts as an 
intermediary between the id and the external world. The 
principal characteristics of the ego are discussed. It has 
the task of self-preservation. As regards external events, 
it becomes aware of stimuli, sorts experiences about 
them, avoids excessively strong stimuli, deals with 
moderate stimuli, and learns to bring about expedient 
changes in the external world to its own advantage. As 
regards internal events, in relation to the id, the ego 
performs that task by gaining control over the demands 
of the instincts, by deciding whether they are to be 
allowed satisfaction, by postponing that satisfaction to 
times and circumstances favorable in the external world, 
or by suppressing their excitations entirely. The long 
period of childhood, during which the growing human 
being lives in dependence on his parents, leaves behind it 
a special agency, the superego, in which this parental 
influence is prolonged. An action by the ego should 
satisfy simultaneously the demands of the id, of the 
superego and of reality. The id and superego have 1 
thing in common: both represent the influences of the 
past, the id the influence of heredity, the superego the 
influence of what is taken over from other people. The 
ego is principally determined by the individual’s own 
experience. 



1940 A 23/148 

An outline of psychoanalysis (1940). Part I. The mind 
and its workings. Chapter II: The theory of the instincts. 

The theory of the instincts is presented. The power of 
the id expresses the true purpose of the individual 
organism’s life. The ego has the task of self-preservation. 
The main function of the superego is the limitation of 
satisfactions. The forces which exist behind the tensions 
caused by the needs of the id are called instincts. The 
existence of only two basic instincts is assumed: Eros 
and the destructive instinct. The aim of the first of these 
basic instincts is to establish ever greater unities and to 
preserve them; the aim of the second is to undo 
connections and so to destroy them. So long as the 
second instinct operates internally, as a death instinct.it 
remains silent; it only comes to our notice when it is 
diverted outwards as an instinct of destruction. The 
whole aviailable quota of libido is stored up in the ego. 
This state is called absolute, primary narcissism. It lasts 
till the ego begins to cathect the ideas of objects with 
libido, to transform narcissistic libido into object libido. 
Throughout the whole of life the ego remains the 
great reservoir from which libidinal cathexes are sent out 
to objects and into which they are also once more 
withdrawn. The most prominent of the parts of the 
body from which the libido arises are known by the 
name of erogenic zones. 

1940A 23/152 

An outline of psychoanalysis (1940). Part I. The mind 
and its workings. Chapter III: The development of the 
sexual function. 

The development of the sexual function is presented. 
The principal findings of psychoanalysis are: (1) sexual 
life does not begin at puberty, but is clearly manifested 
soon after birth; (2) it is necessary to distinguish sharply 
between the concepts of sexual and genital; (3) sexual 
life includes the function of obtaining pleasure from 
zones of the body, a function which is subsequently 
brought into the service of reproduction. The first organ 
to emerge as an erotogenic zone and to make libidinal 
demands on the mind is the mouth. During this oral 
phase, sadistic impulses already occur sporadically along 
with the appearance of the teeth. Their extent is far 
greater in the second phase, which is described as the 
sadistic anal one, because satisfaction is then sought in 
aggression and in the excretory function. The third 
phase is that known as the phallic one, which is, as it 
were, a forerunner of the final form taken by sexual life 
and already much resembles it. With the phallic phase 
and in the course of it, the sexuality of early childhood 
reaches its height and approaches its dissolution. There- 
after boys and girls have different histories. The boy 
enters the Oedipus phase. The girl, after vainly attempt- 



169 



1940A 23/157 



O 

ERIC 



mg to do the same as the boy, comes to recognize her 
lack of a penis or rather the inferiority of her clitoris, 
with permanent effects on the development of her 
character. The complete sexual organization is only 
achieved at puberty, in a fourth, genital phase. A state of 
things is then established in which (1) some earlier 
libidinal cathexes are retained (2) others are taken into 
the sexual function as preparatory, auxiliary acts, the 
satisfaction of which produces what is known as 
forepleasure, and (3) other urges are excluded from the 
organization, and are either suppressed altogether or 
employed in the ego in another way, forming character 
traits or undergoing sublimation with a displacement of 
their aims. When this process malfunctions, disturbances 
of sexual life result. An example of a developmental 
inhibition would be homosexuality. The normal and 
abnormal manifestations observed by us need to be 
described from the point of view of their dynamics and 
economics. The etiology of neurotic disorders is to be 
looked for in the individual’s developmental history. 



1940A 23/157 

An outline of psychoanalysis (1940). Part 1. The mind 
and its workings. Chapter IV : Psychical qualities. 

Psychical qualities are discussed. Psychoanalysis 
explains the supposedly somatic concommitant phe- 
nomena as being what is truly psychical, and thus in the 
first instance disregards the quality of consciousness. 
What Freud calls conscious is the same as the conscious- 
ness of philosophers and of everyday opinions. Every- 
thing else psychical is the unconscious. However, some 
processes become conscious easily; they may then cease 
to be conscious, but can become conscious once more 
without any trouble: as people say, they can be 
reproduced or remembered. In general, consciousness is 
a highly fugitive state. Everything unconscious that is 
capable of becoming conscious is called preconscious. 
Three qualities are attributed to psychical processes: 
they are either conscious, preconscious, or unconscious. 
What is preconscious becomes conscious, and in the 
process we may have a feeling that we are often 
overcoming very strong resistances. The process of 
something becoming conscious is linked with the percep- 
tions which our sense organs receive from the external 
world. Tills process takes place in the outermost cortex 
of the ego. The inside of the ego, which comprises all the 
thought processes, has the quality of being preconscious. 
The sole prevailing quality in the id is that of being 
unconscious. The processes in the unconscious or in the 
id obey different laws from those in the preconscious 
ego. We name these laws in their totality the primary 
process, in contrast to the secondary process which 
governs the course of events in the preconscious, in the 
ego. 



1940A 23/165 

An outline of psychoanalysis (1940). Part 1. The mind 
and its woikings. Chapter V: Dream-interpretation as an 
illustration. 

We find our way to the understanding of a dream by 
assuming that what we recollect as the dream after we 
have woken up is not the true dream process but only a 
facade behind which the process lies concealed. The 
process which produces the manifest dream content out 
of the latent dream thoughts is described as the dream 
work. The study of the dream work teaches us the way 
in which unconscious material from the id forces its way 
into the ego, becomes preconscious and, as a result of 
the ego’s opposition, undergoes the changes known as 
dream distortion. Dream formation can be provoked if 
(1) an ordinarily suppressed instinctual impulse finds 
sufficient strength during sleep to make itself felt by the 
ego or (2) an urge left over from waking life finds 
reinforcement during sleep from an unconscious ele- 
ment. Thus dreams arise from either the id or the ego. 
Evidence for the share taken by the unconscious id in 
the dream formation is discussed. Dream work is 
essentially an instance of the unconscious working over 
of preconscious thought processes. Two peculiarities of 
dream work (condensation and displacement) are dis- 
cussed. With the help of the unconscious, every dream 
that is in the process of formation makes a demand upon 
the ego, for the satisfaction of an instinct, if the dream 
originates from the id; for the solution of a conflict, the 
removal of a doubt or the forming of an intention, if the 
dream originates from a residue of preconscious activity 
in waking life. The sleeping ego, however, is focused on 
the wish to maintain sleep; it feels this demand as a 
disturbance and seeks to get rid of the disturbance. The 
ego succeeds in doing this by what appears to be an act 
of compliance: it meets the demand with a harmless 
fulfillment of a wish and so gets rid of it. This 
replacement of the demand by the fulfillment of a wish 
remains the essential function of the dream work. 

1940A 23/172 

An outline of psychoanalysis (1940). Part II. The 
practical task. Chapter VI: The technique of psycho- 
analysis. 

The technique of psychoanalysis is presented. It is the 
ego’s task to meet the demands raised by its three 
dependent relations: to reality, to the id, and to the 
superego; and nevertheless at the same time to preserve 
its own organization and maintain its own autonomy. If 
the patient’s ego is to be a useful ally, it must have 
retained a certain amount of coherence and some 
fragment of understanding for the demands of reality, 
however hard it may be pressed by the hostile powers. 
The method is only useful with neurotics, not psycho- 
tics. The fundamental rule of analysis pledges the patient 

170 




1940A 23/195 



O 

ERIC 



to tell everything that his self-observation yields includ- 
ing the irrelevant, nonsensual or disagreeable. The 
patient is not satisfied with regarding the analyst as a 
helper and adviser but sees in him some important figure 
out of his childhood and consequently transfers on to 
him feelings and reactions which applied to this proto- 
type. This fact of transference soon proves to be a factor 
of importance. If the patient puts the analyst in the 
palce of his father, he is also giving him the power which 
his superego exercises over his ego. The new superego 
now has an opportunity for a sort of after-education of 
the neurotic. The ego protects itself against the invasion 
of the undesired elements from the unconscious and 
repressed id by means of anticathexes, which must 
remain intact if it is to function normally. The over- 
coming of resistances is the part of the work that 
requires the most time and the greatest trouble.Two new 
factors, as sources of resistance, are: (1) the sense of 
guilt or consciousness of built, and (2) those cases in 
which the instinct of self-preservation has actually been 
reversed and the patient aims at nothing other than 
self-injury and self-destruction. Standing in the way of 
successful psychoanalysis are the negative transference, 
the ego’s resistance due to repression, the sense of guilt 
arising from its relation to the superego and the need to 
be ill due to profound changes in the economics of the 
patient’s instincts. 

1940A 23/183 

An outline of psychoanalysis (1940). Part II. The 
practical task. Chapter VII: An example of psycho- 
analytic work. 

The neuroses and psychoses are the states in which 
disturbances in the functioning of the psychical appara- 
tus come to expression. Neuroses have been chosen as 
the subjects of study because they alone seem accessible 
to the psychological methods of intervention. The 
neuroses have no specific determinants. Quantitative 
disharmonies are what must be held responsible for the 
inadequacy and sufferings of neurotics. It seems that 
neuroses are acquired only in early childhood (up to the 
age of 6), even though their symptoms may not make 
their appearance till much later. The neuroses are 
disorders of the ego. The ego, when it is feeble, 
immature and incapable of resistance, fails to deal with 
tasks which it could cope with later on with utmost ease. 
Instinctual demands from within, no less than excita- 
tions from the external world, operate as traumas, 
particularly if they are met halfway by certain innate 
dispositions. The helpless ego fends them off by means 
of attempts at flight (repressions), which later turn out 
to be inefficient and which involve permanent restric- 
tions on further development. The symptoms of neurosis 
are either a substitutive satisfaction of some sexual urge 
or measures to prevent such a satisfaction or compro- 



mises between Hie two. The relation of the child to his 
mother is analyzed with regard to her as a love object 
and her threats to punish his masturbation with castra- 
tion. The mother usually delegates the act of castration 
to the boy’s father. The Oedipus complex is a major 
event in the lives of both boys and girls. The difference 
between the Oedipus complex and the castration com- 
plex in females and males is discussed at length. In 
males, the threat of castration brings the Oedipus 
complex to an end; in females, it is their lack of a penis 
that forces them into their Oedipus complex. 

1940A 23/195 

An outline of psychoanalysis (1940). Part III. The 
theoretical yield. Chapter VIII: The psychical apparatus 
and the external world. 

The core of our being is formed by the obscure id, 
which has no direct communication with the external 
world and is accessible to knowledge only through the 
medium of another agency. Within this id the organic 
instincts operate, which are themselves compounded of 
fusions of two primal forces (Eros and destructiveness) 
in varying proportions and are differentiated from one 
another by their relation to organs or systems of organs. 
The id, cut off from the external world, has a world of 
perception of its own. The ego has been developed out 
of the id’s cortical layer, which, through being adapted 
to the reception and exclusion of stimuli, is in direct 
contact with the external world (reality). Starting from 
conscious perception it has subjected to its influence 
ever larger regions and deeper strata of the id and, in the 
persistence with which it maintains its depe n dence on 
the external world, it bears the indelible stamp of its 
origin. Its psychological function consists in raising the 
passage of events in the id to a higher dynamic level; its 
constructive function consists in interpolating the 
activity of thought which endeavours by means of 
experimental actions to calculate the consequences of 
the course of action proposed. Thus the ego decides 
whether the attempt to obtain satisfaction is to be 
carried out or postponed or if it is not necessary for the 
demand by the instinct to be suppressed altogether as 
being dangerous. This is the reality principle. Since 
memory traces can become conscious just as perceptions 
do, the possibility arises of a confusion which would 
lead to a mistaking of reality; the ego guards itself 
against this by the institution of reality testing. In the 
period of childhood the weak and immature ego is 
permanently damaged by the stresses put upon it in its 
efforts to fend off the dangers peculiar to that period of 
life. Children are protected against dangers from the 
external world by the solicitude of their parents; they 
pay for this security by fear of loss of love. The ego 
pathological states are founded on a cessation or 
slackening of its relation to the external world. The view 

171 



iso 




1940A 23/205 



postulating that in all psychoses there is a splitting of the 
ego (two different attitudes) is discussed with fetishism 
used as an example. 

194CA 23/205 

An outline of psychoanalysis (1940). Part HI. The 
theoretical yield. Chapter IX. The internal world. 

The internal world is discussed. Until the end of the 
first period of childhood (about age 5), the ego mediates 
between the id and the external world, takes over the 
instinctual demands of the former in order to lead them 
to satisfaction, derives perceptions from the latter and 
uses them as memories. Intent on its self-preservation, 
the ego puts itself in defense against excessively strong 
claims from both sides and at the same time, is guided in 
all its decisions by the injunctions of a modified pleasure 
principle. At this age, a portion of the external world 
becomes abandoned as an object and is instead taken 
into the ego and thus becomes an integral part of the 
internal world. This new psychical agency continues to 
carry on the functions which have hitherto been 
performed by the people in the external world: it 
observes the ego, gives its orders, judges it and threatens 
it with punishments. This agency is called the superego 
and functions as the conscience. The superego is the heir 
to the Oedipus complex and is established only after 
that complex has been disposed of. So long as the ego 
works in full harmony with the superego it is not easy to 
distinguish between their manifestations; but tensions 
and estrangements between them make themselves very 
plainly visible. The superego takes up a kind of 
intermediate position between the id and the external 
world, it unites in itself the influences of the present and 
the past. 

1937C 23/209 

Analysis terminable and interminable (1937). Editor’s 
note (1964). 

Analysis Terminable and Intermimble was written 
early in 1937 and published in June. The paper as a 
whole is pessimistic about the therapeutic efficacy of 
psychoanalysis. Its limitations are constantly stressed, 
the difficulties of the procedure and the obstacles 
standing in its way are insisted upon. The factors to 
which Freud draws attention are of a physiological and 
biological nature: they are thus generally unsusceptible 
to psychological influences. There is one respect in 
which the views expressed by Freud in this paper do 
seem to differ from, or even to contradict, his earlier 
ones; namely, in the scepticism expressed by him in 
regard to the prophylactic power of psychoanalysis. His 
doubts extend to the prospects of preventing not merely 
the occurrence of a fresh and different neurosis but even 
a return of a neurosis that has already been treated. The 



basis of this increased scepticism of Freud’s seems to be 
a conviction of the impossibility of dealing with a 
conflict that is not current and of the grave objections to 
converting a latent conflict into a current one. It is of 
interest to note that at the very beginning of his practice 
Freud was worried by very much 'the same problems as 
these, which may thus be said to have extended over the 
entire length of his analytic studies. 

1937C 23/216 

Analysis terminable and interminable (1937). Part 1. 
Setting a time limit for termination. Part II. Factors 
which may make analysis interminable. 

From the very first, attempts have been made to 
shorten the duration of psychoanalyses. Otto Rank, 
following his book. The Trauma of Birth, supposed that 
the true source of neurosis was the act of birth. He 
hoped that if this primal trauma were dealt with by a 
subsequent analysis, the whole neurosis would be got rid 
of. To speed up an analytic treatment Freud used the 
fixing of a time limit for analysis. The only verdict about 
the value of this device is that it is effective provided 
that one hits the right time for it. But it cannot 
guarantee to accomplish the task completely. The end of 
analysis can mean different things. From a practical 
standpoint, it means that the patient and the analyst 
have ceased to meet each other for the analytic session. 
The other meaning is that the analyst has had such a 
far-reaching influence on the patient that no further 
change could be expected to take place in him if his 
analysis were continued. A constitutional strength of 
instinct and an unfavorable alteration of the ego 
acquired in its defensive struggle in the sense of its being 
dislocated and restricted are the factors which are 
prejudicial to the effectiveness of analysis and which 
may make its duration interminable. Two examples are 
given illustrating that even a successful analytic treat- 
ment does not prevent the patient from falling ill later 
on from another neurosis, or, of a neurosis derived from 
the same instinctual root recurrence of the same old 
trouble. The exacting demands upon analytic therapy 
hardly call for a shortening of its duration. 

1937C 23/224 

Analysis terminable and interminable (1937). Part III. 
The strength of the instincts vis-a-vis the other psychical 
agencies. 

There are three factors which are decisive for the 
success or failure of analytic treatment: the influence of 
traumas, the constitutional strength of the instincts, and 
the laterations of the ego. The constitutional factor is of 
decisive importance from the very beginning; however, a 
reinforcement of instinct coming later in life might 
produce the same effects. Twice in the course of 



. .172 



1937C 23/240 



individual development certain instincts are considerably 
reinforced: at puberty and, in women, at the meno- 
pause. We are not in the least surprised if a person who 
was not neurotic before becomes so at these times. In 
endeavoring to replace insecure repressions by reliable 
ego syntonic controls, we do not always achieve our aim 
to its full extent, that is, do not achieve it thoroughly 
enough. The transformation is achieved, but often only 
partially. Analysis does not always succeed in ensuring 
to a sufficient degree the foundations on which a control 
of instinct is based. The cause of such a partial failure is 
easily discovered. In the past, the quantitative factor of 
instinctual strength opposed the ego’s defensive efforts; 
for that reason we called in the work of analysis to help; 
and now that same factor sets a limit to th> efficacy of 
this new effort. If the strength of the uistinct is 
excessive, the mature ego, supported by analysis, fails in 
its task, just as the helpless ego failed formerly. 

1937C 23/230 

Analysis terminable and interminable (1937). Part IV. 
Protecting against future conflicts. 

Two problems are considered: whether we can 
protect a patient from future conflicts while we are 
treating one instinctual conflict, and wehther it is 
feasible and expedient, for prophylactic purposes, to stir 
up a conflict which is not at the time manifest. The first 
task can only be carried out in so far as the second one 
is; that is, in so far as a possible future conflict is turned 
into an actual present one upon which influence is then 
brought to bear. If an instinctual conflict is not a 
currently active one, is not manifesting itself, we cannot 
influence it even by analysis. In analytic prophylaxis 
against instinctual conflicts, the only methods which 
come into consideration are: (1) the artificial production 
of new conflicts in the transference (conflicts which lack 
the character of reality), and (2) the arousing of such 
conflicts in the patient’s imagination by talking to him 
about them and making him tamiliar with their possi- 
bility. By telling the patient about the possibilities of 
other instinctual conflicts, we arouse his expectation 
that such conflicts may occur in him. What we hope is 
that this information and this warning will have the 
effect of activating in him one of the conflicts in a 
modest degree and yet sufficiently for treatment. The 
expected result does not come about; all we have done is 
increased his knowledge but altered nothing else in him. 
An analogous experience in which children are given 
sexual enlightenment is discussed. 

1937C 23/234 

Analysis terminable and interminable (1937). Part V. 
Alterations of the ego affect prognosis. 

The factors which are decisive for the success of the 
therapeutic efforts are the influence of traumatic etiol- 



ogy, the relative strength of the instincts which have to 
be controlled, and an alteration of the ego. The analytic 
situation consists in our allying ourselves with the ego of 
the person under treatment, in order to subdue portions 
of his id which are uncontrolled. The ego has to try to 
fulfill its task of mediating between its id and the 
external world in the service of the pleasure principle, 
and to protect the id from the dangers of the external 
world. Under the influence of education the ego grows 
accustomed to removing the scene of the fight from 
outside to within and to mastering the internal danger of 
before it has become an external one. During this fight 
on two fronts, the ego makes use of various procedures 
for fulfilling its task, which is to avoid danger, anxiety, 
and unpleasure. These procedures are called mechanisms 
of defense. In psychoanalysis the defensive mechanisms 
directed against former danger recur in the treatment 
procedure as resistances against recovery. Thus the ego 
treats recovery as a new danger. The therapeutic effect 
depends on making conscious what is repressed in the id. 
The effect brought about in the ego by the defenses can 
rightly be described as an alteration of the ego if by that 
we understand a deviation from the normal ego which 
would guarantee unshakable loyalty to the work of 
analysis. The outcome of an analytic treatment depends 
essentially on the strength and on the depth of these 
resistances that bring about an alteration of the ego. 

1937C 23/240 

Analysis terminable and interminable (1937). Part VI. 
Constitutional variables in ego, libido and free aggres- 
siveness. 

Each ego is endowed with individual dispositions and 
trends. The properties of the ego which we meet with in 
the form of resistances can be determined by heredity or 
can be acquired in defensive struggles. There are various 
kinds of resistance. There are people to whom is 
attributed a special adhesiveness of the libido. Another 
group of patients has an attitude which can only be put 
down to a depletion of plasticity, the capacity for 
change and further development. In yet another group 
of cases the distinguishing characteristics of the ego, 
which are to be held responsible as sources of resistance 
against analytic treatment and as impediments to the 
therapeutic success, may spring from different and 
deeper roots. Here we are dealing with the ultimate 
things which psychological research can learn about: the 
behavior of the two primal instincts, their distribution, 
mingling, and defusion. In studying the phenomena 
which testify to the activity of the destructive instinct, 
we are not confined to observations on pathological 
material There have always been, as there still are, 
people v'ho can take as their sexual objects members of 
their own sex as well as of the opposite one, without the 
one trend interfering with the other. The two funda- 
mental principles of Empedocles are the same as Eros 



r" 



1937C 23/247 



and destructiveness: the first endeavors to combine what 
exists into ever greater unities, while the second 
endeavors to dissolve those combinations and to destroy 
the structures to which they have given rise. 

1937C 23/247 

Analysis terminable and interminable (1937). Part VII. 
Factors in the analyst affect prognosis. 

In 1927, Ferenczi read an instructive paper on the 
problem of terminating analyses. It ends with a comfort- 
ing assurance that analysis is not an endless process, but 
one which can be brought to a natural end with 
sufficient skill and patience on the analyst’s part. 
Ferenczi makes the further important point that success 
depends very largely on the analyst’s having learnt 
sufficiently from his own errors and mistakes and having 
got the better of the weak points in his personality. It 
cannot be disputed that analysts in their own person- 
alities have not invariably come up to the standard of 
psychical normality to which they wish to educate their 
patients. Opponents of analysis often point to this fact 
with scorn and use it as an argument to show the 
uselessness of analytic exertions. The special conditions 
of analytic work do actually cause the analyst’s own 
defects to interfere with his making a correct assessment 
of the state of things in his patient and reacting to them 
in a useful way. The termination of an analysis is a 
practical matter. Every experienced analyst will be able 
to recall a number of cases in which he has bidden his 
patient a permanent farewell. The purpose of the 
analysis is to secure the best possible psychological 
conditions for the functions of the ego; with that it has 
discharged its task. 

1937C 23/250 

Analysis terminable and interminable (1937). Part VIII. 
Bisexuality is the strongest resistance to analysis. 

Both in therapeutic and in character analyses, two 
themes come into prominence and give the analyst an 
unusual amount of trouble. The two themes are an envy 
for the penis, a positive striving to possess a male genital 
in the female and, in the male, a struggle against his 
passive or feminine attitude to another male. What is 
common to the two themes was singled out at an early 
date by psychoanalytic nomenclature as an attitude 
towards the castration complex. In both cases, it is the 
attitude to the opposite sex which has succumbed to 
repression. The paramount importance of these two 
themes did not escape Ferenczi’s notice. In the paper 
read by him in 1927, he made it a requirement that in 
every successful analysis these two complexes must be 
mastered. At no other point in one’s analytic work does 
one suffer more from an oppressive feeling that all one’s 
repeated efforts have been in vain than when one is 



trying to persuade a woman to abandon her wish for a 
penis since it is unrealizable or when one is seeking to 
convince a man that a passive attitude to men does not 
always signify castration and that it is indispensable in 
many relationships in life. The rebellious overcompensa- 
tion of the male produces one of the strongest transfer- 
ence resistances. The resistance prevents any change 
from taking place. 

1937D 23/255 

Constructions in analysis (1937). Part I. The analyst’s 
task requires constructions in analysis. 

Constructions in Analysis was published in December, 
1937. Three examples of constructions in Freud’s 
writings: the Rat Man, the Wolf Man, and the case 
history of a homosexual girl. It is familiar ground that 
the work of analysis aims at inducing the patient to give 
up the repressions belonging to his early development 
and to replace them by reactions of a sort that would 
correspond to a psychically mature condition. With this 
purpose in view, he must be brough. to recollect certain 
experiences and the affective impulses caiied up by them 
which he has for the time being forgotten. His present 
symptoms and inhibitions are the consequences of 
repressions of this kind: thus they are a substitute for 
these things that he has forgotten. What we are in search 
of is a picture of the patient’s forgotten years that shall 
be both trustworthy and, in all essential respects, 
complete. The analyst’s work of construction, or of 
reconstruction, resembles to a great extent an archaeol- 
ogist’s excavation of some dwelling place or of some 
ancient edifice that has been destroyed and buried. Only 
by analytic technique can we succeed in bringing what is 
concealed completely to light. 

1937D 23/260 

Constructions in analysis (1937). Part II. Evaluating the 
patient’s reactions to a construction. 

Every analyst knows that two kinds of work are 
carried on side by side. The analyst finishes a piece of 
construction and communicates it to the subject so that 
it may work upon him; the analyst then constructs a 
further piece out of the fresh material pouring in upon 
him, deals with it in the same way and proceeds in this 
alternating fashion until the end. We cannot neglect the 
indications that can be inferred from the patient’s 
reaction upon offering him one of our constructions, 
nevertheless a straight Yes or No answer is not to be 
taken at face value. These Yes and No answers are both 
considered ambiguous. The direct utterances of the 
patient after he has been offered a construction afford 
very little evidence about whether we have been right or 
wrong. The indirect forms of confirmation are used. One 
of these is a form of words that is used with very little 

174 



183 



1940B 



23/279 



variation by the most different people: “I didn’t ever 
think.” This can be translated into: “Yes, you’re right 
this time, about my unconscious.” Indirect confirmation 
from associations that fit in with the content of a 
construction is likely to be confirmed in the course of 
the analysis. It is particularly striking when, by means of 
a parapraxis, a confirmation of this kind insinuates itself 
into a direct denial. There is no justification for the 
reproach that we neglect or underestimate the impor- 
tance of the attitude taken up by those under analysis 
towards our constructions. We pay attention to them 
and often derive valuable information from them. But 
these reactions are rarely unambiguous and give no 
opportunity for a final judgment. Only the further 
course of the analysis enables us to decide whether our 
constructions are correct or unserviceable. 

1937D 23/265 

Constructions in analysis (1937). Part III. The distinc- 
tion between historical and material truth. 

The path that starts from the analyst’s construction 
ought to end in the patient’s recollection; but it does not 
always lead so far. Quite often we do not succeed in 
bringing the patient to recollect what has been repressed. 
Instead of that, if the analysis is carried out correctly, 
we produce in him an assured conviction of the truth of 
the construction which achieves t - same therapeutic 
result as a recaptured memory. Freud is struck by the 
manner in which the communication of an apt construc- 
tion has evoked a surprising phenomenon in the patients. 
They have had lively recollections called up in them, but 
what they have recollected has not been the event that 
was the subject of the construction, but details relating 
to that subject. The upward drive of the repressed, 
stirred into activity by the putting forward of the 
construction, has striven to carry the important memory 
traces into consciousness; but a resistance has succeeded, 
not in stopping that movement, but in displacing it on to 
adjacent objects of minor significance. These recollec- 
tions might have been described as hallucinations if a 
belief in their actual presence had been added to their 
clearness. Freud hypothesizes that in delusions, the 
dynamic process is that the turning away from reality is 
exploited by the upward drive of the repressed in order 
to force its content into consciousness, while the 
resistances stirred up by this process and the trend to 
wish fulfillment are responsible for the distortion and 
displacement of what is recollected. 

1940E 23/271 

Splitting of the ego in the process of defence (1940). 

The Splitting of the Ego in the Process of Defence, 
published posthumously, was dated January 2, 1938. 
The ego of a person whom we know as a patient in 
analysis must, dozens of years earlier, when it was 



young, have behaved in a remarkable manner in certain 
particular situations of pressure. The conditions under 
which this happens can be called the influence of a 
psychical trauma. Let us suppose that a child’s ego is 
under the sway of a powerful instinctual demand which 
it is accustomed to satisfy and that it is suddenly 
frightened by an experience which teaches it that the 
continuance of this satisfaction will result in an almost 
intolerable real danger. It must now decide either to 
recognize the real danger, give way to it and renounce 
the instinctual satisfaction, or to disavow reality and 
make itself believe that there is no reason for fear, so 
that it may be able to retain the satisfaction. The child 
replies to the conflict with two contrary reactions. On 
the one hand, with the help of certain mechanisms he 
rejects reality and refuses to accept any prohibition; on 
the other hand, in the same breath he recognizes the 
danger of reality, takes over the fear of that danger as a 
pathological symptom, and tries subsequently to divest 
himself of the fear. The two contrary reactions to the 
conflict persist as the center point of a splitting of the 
ego. An individual case history is discussed concerning 
this point. A small boy created a substitute (fetish) for 
the penis which he missed in females. So long as he was 
not obliged to acknowledge that females have lost their 
penis, there was no need for him to believe the threat of 
castration in punishment for his masturbation. The boy 
did not simply contradict his perceptions and hallucinate 
a penis. He effected no more than a displacement of 
value: he transferred the importance of the penis to 
another part of the body through the assistance of 
regression. He had a great fear of his father. 

1940B 23/279 

Some elementary lessons in psycho-analysis (1940). The 
nature of the psychical. 

Some Elementary Lessons in Psycho-analysis, written 
in London, is dated October 20, 1938. Psychoanalysis 
has little prospect of becoming liked or popular. Being 
conscious is only a quality of what is psychical; the 
psychical is in itself unconscious and probably similar in 
kind to all the other natural processes. Psychoanalysis 
bases this assertion on a number of facts, of which Freud 
proceeded to give a selection. (1) We know what is 
meant by ideas occurring to one, thoughts that suddenly 
come into consciousness without one’s being aware of 
the steps that led up to them, though they, too, must 
have been psychical acts. (2) The second class of 
phenomena includes the parapraxes, the slips of the 
tongues. (3) As a third example, Freud states that it is 
possible in the case of persons in a state of hypnosis to 
prove experimentally that there are such things as 
unconscious psychical acts and that consciousness is not 
an indispensable condition of psychical activity. Freud 
concludes that consciousness is only a quality or 



175 




184 



1938A 23/287 



attribute of what is psychical, and moreover an incon- 
stant one. 



1938A 23/287 

A comment on anti-Semitism (1933). 

A Comment on Anti-Semitism consists almost wholly 
of a quotation from a source which Freud declares that 
he can no longer trace. It has been suggested that the 
quotation is in fact by Freud himself, who chose an 
indirect manner of expressing some rather uncongenial 
views. The views were written by an author who claimed 
that he was not Jewish. Many derogatory, as well as the 
following favorable remarkes are made about Jews. For 
long centuries the Jewish people have been treated 
unjustly and are continuing to be judged unjustly.. The 
Jews do not need alcohol to make life tolerable; crimes 
of brutality, murder, robbery, and sexual violence are 
great rarities among them; they have always set a high 
value on intellectual achievement and interests; their 
family life is intimate; they take care of the poor; and 
charity is a sacred duty to them. 



1937A 23/297 

Lou Andreas-Salome (1937). 

On February 5, 1937, Frau Lou Andreas-Salome died 
at the age of 76 years. For the last 25 years of her life 
she was attached to psychoanalysis, to which she 
contributed valuable writings and which she practiced as 
well. It was known that as a girl she had kept up an 
intense friendship with Friedrich Nietzsche, founded 
upon her deep understanding of the philosopher's bold 
ideas. Many years later she had acted as Muse and 
protecting mother to Rainer Maria Rilke, the great poet, 
who was somewhat helpless in facing life. In 1912 she 
returned to Vienna in order to be initiated into 
psychoanalysis. Anna Freud, who was her close friend, 
once heard her regret that she had not known psycho- 
analysis in her youth, but in those days it had not been 
defined. 



1941F 23/299 

Findings, ideas, problems (1941). 

A series of short disconnected paragraphs (in order by 
date) were printed at the end of the volume of 
posthumous works published in 1941 under the heading 
of Findings, Ideas, Problems : London, June, 1938. One 
dated June 16 points out that in connection with early 
experiences, as contrasted with later experiences, all the 
various reactions to them survive, of course including 
contradictory ones. July 12: As a substitute for penis 
envy, identification with the clitoris is proposed: neatest 
expression of inferiority, source of all inhibitions. At the 
same time, there is a disavowal of the discovery that 
other women too are without a penis. July 12: With 
neurotics, it is as though we were in a prehistoric 
landscape. July 20: The individual perishes from his 
internal conflicts, the species perishes in its struggle with 
the external world to which it is no longer adapted. 
August 3: A sense of guilt originates from unsatisfied 
love as well as from hate. The ultimate ground of all 
intellectual inhibition and all inhibitions of work seems 
to be the inhibition of masturbation in childhood. 
August 22: Space may be the projection of the 
extension of the psychical apparatus. Mysticism is the 
obscure self-perception of the realm outside the ego, of 
the id. 

1938D 23/301 

Anti-semitism in England (1938). 

Anti-Semitism is discussed in a letter to the editor of 
London’s Time and Tide. After 68 years of work in 
Vienna, Freud had to leave his home, saw the scientific 
society he had founded dissolved, his institutions 
destroyed, his printing press taken over by the invaders, 
the books he had published confiscated or reduced to 
pulp, and his children expelled from their professions. 
Freud suggested that the column should be reserved for 
the opinions of non-Jewish people less involved than 
himself. Freud was deeply affected by the acknowledge- 
ment of a certain growth of anti-Semitism even in 
England. Freud felt that the persecution ought to give 
rise to a wave of sympathy. 



176 

1£5 



APPENDIX 



This cross-reference list relates the Tyson-Strachey “Chronological Hand-List of Freud’s 
Works” to the volume and page number of the Standard Edition and is arranged by 
Tyson-Strachey number. Page numbers may vary by one or two from the number as- 
signed in the abstract section due to allowances for Editor’s notes and introductions in 
the Standard Edition or the combining of two or more short subjects into one abstract. 



1886D 


1/ 24 


Observation of a severe case of 
hemi-anaesthesia in a hysterical 
male 


1886F 


1/ 19 


Lectures on diseases of the nervous 
system 


1887A 


1/ 35 


Review of Averbeck 


1887B 


1/ 36 


Review of S. Weir Mitchell 


1888B 


1/ 39 


Hysteria 


1888X 


1/ 73 


Introduction to Bernheim 


1889 A 


1/ 90 


Review of Forel 


189 ID 


1/103 


Hypnosis 


1892A 


1/131 


Preface and notes to J. M. Charcot 
Tuesday lectures 


1892B 


1/116 


A case of successful treatment by 
hypnotism 


1893A 


2/ 3 


On the psychical mechanism of 
hysterical phenomena: prelim- 
inary communication 


1893C 


1/157 


Some points for a comparative 
study of organic and hysterical 
motor paralyses 


1893F 


3/ 9 


Charcot 


1893H 


3/ 26 


On the psychical mechanism of 
hysterical phenomena 


1894A 


3/ 43 


The neuro-psychoses of defence 


1895B 


3/ 87 


On the grounds for detaching a par- 
ticular syndrome from neuras- 
thenia under the description 
anxiety neurosis 


1895C 


3/ 71 


Obsessions and phobias 


1895D 


2/ 21 


Studies on hysteria 


1895F 


3/121 


A reply to criticisms of my paper 
on anxiety neurosis 


1896A 


3/142 


Heredity and the aetiology of the 
neuroses 


1896B 


3/159 


Further remarks on the neuro- 
psychoses of defence 


1896C 


3/189 


The aetiology of hysteria 


1896D 


1/ 86 


Preface to second edition of Bern- 
heim 


1897B 


3/225 


Abstracts of the scientific writings 
of Dr.Sigm. Freud 



1898A 


3/261 


Sexuality in the aetiology of the 
neuroses 


1898B 


3/288 


The psychical mechanism of forget- 
ting 


1899 A 


3/301 


Screen memories 


1900 A 


4/ 1 


The interpretation of dreams 


190 1 A 


5/631 


On dreams 


190 IB 


6/ 1 


The psychopathology of everyday 
life 


1901C 


3/324 


Autobiographical note 


1903A 


9/253 


Review of Georg Biedenkapp 


1904A 


7/248 


Freud’s psycho-analytic procedure 


1904B 


9/254 


Review of John Bigelow 


1904E 


9/255 


Obituary of Prof. S. Hammerschlag 


1905A 


7/256 


On psychotherapy 


1905B 


7/282 


Psychical (or mental) treatment 


1905C 


8/ 3 


Jokes and their relation to the 
unconscious 


1905D 


7/125 


Three essays on the theory of sex- 
uality 


1905E 


7/ 3 


Fragment of an analysis of a case of 
hysteria 


1906 A 


7/270 


My views on the part played by sex- 
uality in the aetiology of the 
neuroses 


1906B 


3/ 3 


Preface to Freud’s collected writ- 
ings on neuroses 


1906C 


9/ 99 


Psycho-analysis and the establish- 
ment of the facts in legal pro- 
ceedings 


1907A 


91 3 


Delusions and dreams in Jensen’s 
Gradiva 


1907B 


9/116 


Obsessive acts and religious prac- 
tices 


1907C 


9/130 


The sexual enlightenment of child- 
ren 


1907D 


9/245 


Contribution to a questionnaire on 
reading 


1907E 


9/248 


Prospectus for Schriften 


1908A 


9/157 


Hysterical phantasies and their rela- 
tion to bisexuality 



177 

186 




1908B 


9/168 


Character and anal erotism 


1908C 


9/207 


On the sexual theories of children 


1908D 


9/179 


Civilized sexual ethics and modern 
nervous illness 


1908E 


9/142 


Creative writers and day-dreaming 


1908F 


9/250 


Preface to Stekel 


1909 A 


9/228 


Some general remarks on hysterical 
attacks 


1909B 


10/ 3 


Analysis of a phobia in a five-year- 
old boy 


1909C 


9/236 


Family romances 


1909D 


10/153 


Notes upon a case of obsessional 
neurosis 


1910A 


11/ 3 


Five lectures on psycho-analysis 


1910B 


9/252 


Preface to Ferenczi’s papers on 
psycho-analysis 


1910C 


11/ 59 


Leonardo Da Vinci and a memory 
of his childhood 


1910D 


11/140 


The future prospects of psycho- 
analytic therapy 


1910E 


11/154 


The antithetical sense of primal 
words 


1910F 


11/233 


Letter to Dr. Friedrich S. Krauss 


1910G 


11/231 


Contributions to a discussion on 
suicide 


1910H 


11/164 


A special type of choice of object 
made by men 


19101 


11/210 


The psycho-analytic view of 
psychogenic disturbance of 
vision 


1910J 


11/236 


Two instances of pathogenic phan- 
tasies revealed by the patients 
themselves 


1910K 


11/220 


Wild psycho-analysis 


1910M 


11/238 


Review of Wilh. Neutra 


191 IB 


12/215 


Formulations on the two principles 
of mental functioning 


191 1C 


12/ 3 


Psycho-analytic notes on an auto- 
biographical account of a case 
of paranoia (dementia para- 
noides) 


191 1 D 


12/341 


The significance of vowel sequences 


191 IE 


12/ 85 


The handling of dream- 
interpretation in psycho-analysis 


191 IF 


12/342 


Great is Diana of the Ephesians 


1912A 


12/ 80 


Postscript to the case of paranoia 


1912B 


12/ 98 


The dynamics of transference 


1912C 


12/229 


Types of onset of neurosis 


1912D 


11/178 


On the universal tendency to de- 
basement in the sphere of love 



1912E 


12/110 


Recommendations to physicians 
practising psycho-analysis 


1912F 


12/241 


Contributions to a discussion on 
masturbation 


1912G 


12/257 


A note on the unconscious in 
psycho-analysis 


1912X 


13/ 1 


Totem and taboo 


1913A 


12/268 


An evidential dream 


1913B 


12/328 


Introduction to Pfister 


1913C 


12/122 


On beginning the treatment (fur- 
ther recommendations on the 
technique of psycho-analysis) 


1913D 


12/280 


The occurrence in dreams of mate- 
rial from fairy tales 


1913E 


12/345 


Preface to Steiner 


1913F 


12/290 


The theme of the three caskets 


1913G 


12/304 


Two lies told by children 


1913H 


13/192 


Observations and examples from 
analytic practice 


19131 


12/313 


The predisposition to obsessional 
neurosis 


1913J 


13/164 


The claims of psycho-analysis to 
scientific interest 


1913K 


12/334 


Preface to J. G. Bourke’s scatalogic 
rites of all nations 


1913M 


12/206 


On psycho-analysis 


1914A 


13/200 


Fausse reconnaissance in psycho- 
analytic treatment 


1914B 


13/210 


The Moses of Michaelangelo 


1914C 


14/ 69 


On narcissism: an introduction 


1914D 


14/ 3 


On the history of the psycho- 
analytic movement 


1914F 


13/240 


Some reflections on schoolboy 
psychology 


1914G 


12/146 


Recollecting, repeating and working 
through (further recommenda- 
tions on the technique of 
psycho-analysis, II) 


1915A 


12/158 


Observations on transference-love 
(further recommendations on 
the technique of psycho- 
analysis, HI) 


1915B 


14/274 


Thoughts for the times on war and 
death 


1915C 


14/105 


Instincts and their vicissitudes 


1915D 


14/143 


Repression 


1915E 


14/161 


The unconscious 


1915F 


14/262 


A case of paranoia running counter 



to the psycho-analytic theory of 
the disease 



178 

1&7 




1915G 14/301 Letter to Dr. F. Van Eeden 

1916A 14/304 On transience 

1916B 14/337 A mythological parallel to a visual 

obsession 

1916C 14/339 A connection between a symbol 

and a symptom 

1916D 14/310 Some charact;:-types met with in 

psycho-analytic work 

1916X 15/ 3 Introductory lectures on psycho- 

analysis 

1917A 17/136 A difficulty in the path of psycho- 
analysis 

1917B 17/146 A childhood recollection from 

Dichtung and Wahrheit 

191 7C 17/126 On transformation of instinct as 

exemplified in anal erotism 

1917D 14/219 A metapsychological supplement to 

the theory of dreams 

1917E 14/239 Mourning and melancholia 

1 9 1 8A 11/192 The taboo of virginity 

191 8B 17/ 3 From the history of an infantile 

neurosis 

1919A 17/158 Lines of advance in psycho-analytic 

therapy 

1919B 17/271 James J. Putnam 

1919C 17/267 A note on psycho-analy tic publica- 
tions and prizes 

1919D 17/206 Introduction to psycho-analysis and 

the war neuroses 

1919E 17/177 A child is being beaten 
1919F 17/273 Victor Tausk 

1919G 17/258 Preface to Reik’s ritual: psycho- 

analytic studies 

1919H 17/218 The uncanny 

19191 14/341 Letter to Dr. Hermine von Hug- 

Hellmuth 

1919J 17/170 On the teaching of psycho-analysis 

at universities 

1920A 18/146 The psychogenesis of a case of fe- 
male homosexuality 

1920B 18/263 A note on the prehistory of the 

technique of analysis 

1920C 18/267 Dr. Anton von Freund 

1920D 18/266 Associations of a four-year-old 

child 

1920F 18/ 4 Supplements to the theory of 

dreams 

1920G 18/ 3 Beyond the pleasure principle 

1921 A 18/269 Preface to J. J. Putnam’s addresses 

on psycho-analysis 



192 1 B 18/271 Introduction to J. Varendonck’s 

the psychology of day-dreams 

192 1C 18/67 Group psychology and the analysis 

of the ego 

1922A 18/196 Dreams and telepathy 

1922B 18/222 Some neurotic mechanisms in jeal- 
ousy, paranoia and homosexual- 
ity 

1922C 10/148 Postscript to the analysis of a pho- 
bia in a five-year-old boy 

1922E 19/283 Preface to De-Saussure 

1923A 18/234 Two encyclopaedia articles 

1923B 19/ 3 The ego and the id 

1923C 19/108 Remarks on the theory and practice 

of dream-interpretation 

1923D 19/69 A seventeenth century demonologi- 

-cal neurosis 

1923E 19/140 The infantile genital organization of 

the libido 

1923F 19/260 Josef Popper-Lynkeus and the 

theory of dreams 

1923G 19/285 Preface to Eitingon’s report on the 

Berlin psycho-analytical clinic 
1923H 19/289 Letter to Luis Lopez 

19231 19/266 Dr. Sandor Ferenczi on his fiftieth 

birthday 

1924A 19/290 Communication to Le-Disque-Ven 

1924B 19/148 Neurosis and psychosis 

1924C 19/157 The economic problem of maso- 

chism 

1924D 19/172 The dissolution of the Oedipus 

complex 

1924E 19/182 The loss of reality in neurosis and 

psychosis 

1924F 19/190 A short account of psycho-analysis 

1924G 19/286 Letter to Wittels 

1925A 19/226 A note upon the mystic-writing-pad 

1925B 19/291 Letter to the editor 

1925C 19/292 Message on the opening of the He- 

brew University 

1925D 20/ 3 An autobiographical study 

1925E 19/212 The resistances to psycho-analysis 

1925F 19/272 Preface to Aichhorn’s wayward 

youth 

1925G 19/278 Josef Breuer 

1925H 19/234 Negation 

19251 19/125 Some additional notes upon dream- 

interpretation as a whole 

179 



188 



1925J 


19/243 


Some psychological consequences 


1933A 


22/ 3 


New introductory lectures on 






of the anatomical distinction be- 






psycho-analysis 






tween the sexes 


1933B 


22/197 


Why war? 


1926A 


20/279 


To Romain Roiland 


1933C 


22/226 


Sandor Ferenczi 


1926B 


20/277 


Karl Abraham 


1933D 


22/254 


Preface to Marie Bonaparte’s Edgar 


1926C 


20/280 


Foreword to E. Pickworth Farrow’s 






Poe 






a practical method of self- 


1935A 


20/ 71 


Postscript (1935) to an aubiograph- 






analysis 






ical study 


1926D 


20/ 77 


Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety 


1935B 


22/232 


The subtleties of a faulty action 


1926E 


20/179 


The question of lay analysis 


1935C 


22/255 


Thomas Mann on his sixtieth birth- 


1926F 


20/261 


Psycho-analysis: Freudian school 






day 


19261 


21/247 


Dr. Reik and the problem of quack- 


1936A 


22/238 


A disturbance of memory on the 






ery 






Acropolis 


1927 A 


20/251 


Postscript to discussion on lay anal- 


1936B 


22/253 


Letter to Richard Sterba 






ysis 


1937A 


23/297 


Lou Andreas-Salome 


1927B 


1 3/237 


Supplement^ the Moses of Michel- 


1937C 


23/211 


Analysis terminable and intermin- 






angelo 






able 


1927C 


21/ 3 


The future of an illusion 


1937D 


23/256 


Construction in analysis 


1927D 


21/160 


Humour 


1938A 


23/289 


A note on anti-Semitism 


1927E 


21/149 


Fetishism 


1938D 


23/301 


Anti-Semitism in England 


1928A 


21/168 


A religious experience 


1939A 


23/ 3 


Moses and monotheism 


1928B 


21/175 


Dostoevsky and parricide 


1940A 


23/141 


An outline of psycho -analysis 


1929 A 


21/249 


To Ernest Jones on the occasion of 


1940B 


23/280 


Some elementary lesson in psycho- 






his fiftieth birthday 






analysis 


1929B 


21/199 


On a dream of Descartes 


1940C 


18/273 


Medusa’s head 


1930A 


21/ 59 


Civilization and its discontents 


1940D 


1/151 


On the theory of hysterical attacks 


1930B 


21/257 


Preface to ten years of the Berlin 


1940E 


23/273 


Splitting of the ego in the process 






psycho-analytic institute 






of defence 


1930C 


21/254 


Preface to psychopathology num- 


1941A 


1/147 


Letter to Josef Breuer 






ber of the medical review of re- 


1941B 


1/149 


Note III 






views 


1941C 


5/623 


A premonitory dream fulfilled 


1930D 


21/206 


Letter to Dr. Alfons Paquet 


1941D 


18/175 


Psycho-analysis and telepathy 


1930E 


21/208 


Address delivered in the Goethe 


1941E 


20/272 


Address to the members of the 






house 






B’nai B’rith 


1931A 


21/216 


Libidinal types 


1941F 


23/299 


Findings, ideas and problems 


1931 B 


21/223 


Female sexuality 


1942 A 


7/304 


Psychopathic characters on the 


1931C 


21/256 


Introduction to Edoardo Weiss 






stage 


1931D 


21/251 


Specialist opinion in the Halsmann 


1950A 


1/175 


The origins of psycho-analysis 






case 


1955A 


10/253 


Original record of the case of obses- 


1931E 


21/259 


Letter to the burgomaster 






sional neurosis (the rat-man) 


193 1 F 


22/251 


Letter to George Fuilis 


1955C 


17/211 


Memorandum on the electrical 


1932 A 


22/185 


The acquisition and control of fire 






treatment of war neuroses 


1932B 


21/258 


Preface to Hermann Nunberg 


195 6 A 


1/ 3 


Report on my studies in Paris and 


1932C 


22/218 


My contact with Josef Popper- 






Berlin 






Lynkeus 


1957A 


12/177 


Dreams in folklore 



r 



180 



o 

ERIC 



189 



SUBJECT INDEX 



Thu subject Index Is machine generated. Keywords In the titles of abstracts appear alphabetically In t.ic left hand nargln; under each keyword Is a 
list of titles In which the keyword appears. The spelling of words In the titles of abstracts has not been changed; hence, two spellings ot the 
some word may oppear In this lndcx««for example, BEHAVIOR and BEHAVIOUR. 

AB&Kf VlATlUNS AEIIGLOGICAL 



PkQJtCT FDR A SCIENTIFIC PSYLMULUoY: EDITOR'S 
INTRODUCTION ANO KEY TO A BUREV I AT IUNS IN THE PROJECT . 



LETTER 14, ICU1TUS-1NTEKHUPTUS AS AN AETIOLCGICAL 
1950A 1/283 FACTOR. I. 



1950A 1/184 



ABERRATIONS 



AETIOLUGV 



THRU ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
AHtRKATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPLCI OF THE SEXUAL 

08JECI. Inver si un • sexually immature persons and 

ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS . • 1 ^OSU 7/136 

THREE EaSAYS UN THE THEORY UF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABLRRATlUNS. UEVlATlONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL A I M. 

ANATUMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 

AIMS. I'M 



OBSESSIONS ANU PHOBIAS: T HE IK PSYCHICAL MECHANISM ANO 

THE I K AET1ULOUY. APPENOIXi FREUD S VIEWS UN PHUblAS. 3/ 83 

UN THE GROUNOS FCJK DETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNDROME F RUM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUKUS1S. 

INCIDENCE ANU AETIOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. *B958 3/ 99 

OBSESSIONS ANO PHOBIAS! THEIR PSYCHICAL MECHANISM AND 

THEIR AETIULOGY. l*95C 3/ 11 



THREE ESSAYS UN THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 

aberrations, the perversions in general. 

three essays on the Tmcokv uf sexuality. The sexual 
ablkrat i ons. the sexual instinct in neurotics. 



1 90 SO 7/160 
1 90 SO 7/163 



HERE Ul TV ANO THE AETIULOGY OF THE NEURUSES. 

FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEURCPSYChOSE S OF DEFENCE. THE 
SPECIFIC AETIOLOGY OF HYSTERIA. 

THE AETIULOGY OF HYSTERIA. 



three essays on The theory of sexualiiy. the sexual 

ABERRATIONS. COMPONENT INSTINCTS ANU ERUTCGENIC ZONES. 1905U 7/167 



SEXUALITY IN THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEURUSES. 



1896A 3/141 



IB90B 3/162 
IB96C 3/189 
189BA 3/261 



THREE ESSAYS UN THE THEORY OF SLXUALlTV. THE SEXUAL 

ABERRATIONS. REASUNS FOR THE APPARtNT PRE RONUERANCE OF 

PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE PSYChUNEURUSES. INTIMATION OF 

THt INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SbXUALlTV. 1905U 7/170 

ABRAHAM 



MV VIEWS ON The PART PLAYED BY SEXUALITY IN the 

AETIULOGY OF THE NEUROSES. I906A 7/271 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSVCHUANALVS I S . GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUKUSIS. SOME THUUuHIS ON DEVELOPMENT AND 

REGRESSION- AETIOLOGY. I9I6XI6/339 



KARL ABRAHAM. 1926B20/277 

ABSTRACTS 

a i* racts of the scientific writings uf ok. sigm. fkEuo 

If * | b97 » IB97B 3/226 

ABSURD 

THL interpretation OF ORE AMS. the uream-wqrk. absuro 

OREAMS - 1NTELLLC T UAL ACTIVITY IN UHEAMS. 1900A 5/426 



ORAFT A. (AETIOLOGY OF ACTUAL NEUROSES.). 

okaft b. the aetiology of the neuruses. 

uraft 0. ON the aetiology and thcurv uf the MAJUR 
NEUROSES. 

LETTER 46. (FOUR PERlOOS OF LIFE AND AETIULOGY.). 
AGE 

LETTER 59. (AGE OF HYSTERICAL FANTASIES. I. 



1950A 1/177 
1 95 OA 1/1/9 

1 950A 1/186 
1950A 1/229 

1 950A 1/244 



absukoity 

jukes anc their relation tu the unconscious, analytic 

PART. THE TECHNIQUE CF JOKES. PUNS) ABSUKOITY AS A 

JOKE TECHNIQUE . 1906'. B/ 47 



AGENCIES 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. THE STRENGTH OF 

THE INSTINCTS VlS-A-VK> THE OTHER PSYCHICAL AGENCIES. I937C23/224 



ACCOUNTS 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. OTHER 

ACCOUNTS OF CULLECTlVE MENTAL LIFE. 192IC18/ B2 

ACQUtbl HUM 

THE ACQUISITION ANO CONTROL UF FlRt. 1932A22/IB5 

ACRUPOL I S 

A DISTURBANCE OF MEMOk/ on THE ACROPOLIS. I936A22/239 



AGGRE SSI UN 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. SECURITY AT THE COST 
UF RESTRICTING SEXUALITY ANO AGGRE SS 1 UN. I930A2I/I0B 

CIVILIZATION ANU ITS 01SCGNTENTS. ARGUMENTS FUR AN 

INSTINCT OF AGGRESS1UN ANO OE SThUC T I UN. I930A21/I17 

AGGRESSIVENESS 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE A NO INTERMINABLE. CONSTITUTIONAL 

VARIABLES IN EGO. LIBIDO ANO FREE AGGRESSIVENESS. 1937C23/240 



ACTIGN 



AICHNORN' S 



THE SUBTLETIES UF 4 FAULTY ACTION. 



1935B22/233 PREFACE TO AlCHHORN'S WAYWARO YOUTH. 



I925F 1 9/273 



ACTIONS 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY UF EVERYDAY LIFE. BUNGltO ACTIONS. 1901B 6/lo2 

the psvchupathulogv gf evervuay life, symptomatic ano 

CHANCE ACTIONS. 190IB 6/191 

UBSESSIVE ACTIUNS ANO RELIGIOUS PRACTICES. I907B 9/115 

ACTIVITY 

THE INTERPRETATION GF UREAMS. THE OREAM-WGKK. ABSURO 

OREAMS - INTELLECTUAL ACTIVITY IN OREAMS. 1900A 5/426 

ACUTL 

TWO SHORT REVIEWS. AVEKBECK'S ACUTE NEURASTHENIA ANO 

WelR MITCHELL'S NEURASTHENIA ANO HYSTERIA. 1887B 1/ 35 

AOOENOUM 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. AOOENOUM: 

ORIGINAL KECORU OF the CASE. (RAT-MAN). 1955A10/25I 

AOOICT ION 

LETTER 79. (MASTURBATION, A00ICT10K AND UBSESSlUNAL 

NEURUS1S.I. I 95 OA 1/272 



AlM 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality, the sexual 

ABERRATIONS. OEVlATlUNS INFESPECT OF THE SEXUAL AlM. 

ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 

AIMS. 19050 7/149 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 

sexuality, the sexual aim of Infantile sexuality. 19050 7/IB3 

aims 

three essays on the theory of sexuality, the sexual 

ABERRATIONS. UEVlATlONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXGAL AlM. 

ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 
AIMS. 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. CTRL'S PRE-0601PAL SEXUAL AIMS TOWARD 

MOTHER. I931B2I/235 

ALTERATIONS 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE . ALTERATIONS UF 

THE EGO AFFECT PROGNOSIS. 1937C23/234 

AMBI VALENCE 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE II). 1912x13/ 18 



AUURESS 

ADURESS TO THE SOCIETY OF B» NA 1-B 1 Rl TH. 

AOLER 

ON THE HISTORY OF T HE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. 
OEPAKTUHtS OF JUNG ANO AOLER. 

AOVANCE 

LINES OF AOVANCE IN PS Y C Hr ANALY T 1C THERAPY. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES* HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MUN0THE1ST RELIGION. THE AOVANCE IN 
INTELLECTUALITY. 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANU EMOTIONAL AMB.VALENCE. 
PARALLEL BETWEEN TABUO ANO OBSESSIONAL NEIM0S1S. 

19‘*1E20, 2 71 T0TEm an0 TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TREATMENT OF ENEMIES. 

totem ano taboo, taboo ano emotional ambivalence, the 

1914014/ 42 TABOO UPON RULERS. 

TUTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TABOO UPUN The OEAO. TABOO ANO CONSCIENCE* 

1919A17/157 

ANAL 

CHARACTER ANO ANAL EROTISM. 

I939A23/1 1 1 



1912X13/ 26 
1912X13/ 35 
1912X13/ 41 
1912X13/ 51 

1908B 9/167 



rr' 



‘iso 



ANAL 



CONIlNUAMOl ANALYSIS 



CONI iNUAl 101 



GN TRANSFORMATIONS UF INSTINCT AS EXEMPLI ME.) IN ANAL 

ERUTISH. I9I7CI7/I25 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILL NEUROSIS. ANAL EROTISM 
A NO THE CASTRATIUN COMPLEX. IwOLFMAN). I910B17/ 72 

ANALOGY 

JUKES ANU THEIR RELATION TU I ML UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIOUE OF JOKES. ANALUGY AS A JOKE 

TECHNIQUE. I90SL 0/ HI 

MUSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES* HlS PEOPLE 

ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE ANALOGY. I939A23/ 72 

LETTER 22. TORE AM AS ANALOGY TO U’S LiREAM PSYCHOSIS. I. 19S0A 1/213 

ANALYSE S 

1 NT ROOUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. ORE AMS. SOME 

ANALYSES UF SAMPLE OREAMS. 1916X15/184 

ANALYSIS 

FURTHER REMARKS ON T #J fc NEUROPSYCHOSIS OF OFFENSE. 

ANALYSIS OF A CASE 01 CHRONIC PARANOIA. I896B 3/174 

THE INTERPRETATION UF DREAMS. THE MtTHOO OF 

interpreting oreamS: an analysis of a specimen uream. 1900a 4/ 96 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE ME THOO OF 

INTERPRETING DREAMS: AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN DREAM 

(PREAMBLE ANO ORE AMI • I900A 4/106 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. 1905E 7/ 3 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. 1905E 7/ 7 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS UF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 

CLINICAL PICTURE. I905E 7/ 15 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 

F IrST OREAM. 1 905 E 7/ 64 

FRAGMENT UF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HVSi Eft 1 A . THE 

SECONO OREAM. I905E 7/ 94 

fragment of an analysis of a case of hysteria. 

POSTSCRIPT. I905E 7/112 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F 1VE-YE Ak-OLO BOY. I909BI0/ 3 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA |N A F IV E-YE AR-OLO BOY. CASE 

HISTURY ANO ANALYSIS OF LIT TLE~HANS. I909B10/ 22 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IVE- YE AR-OLO BOY. 

( LI TTLE-HANSJ . I909B 10/ I'l I 

ANALYSIS UF A PHOBIA IN A F IVE-YE AR-ULfl BOY. 

L 1 TT L E-HANS CASE SHEUS LIGHT ON PHOBIAS. I909B10/I1> 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F I VE-YE AR-OLU BUY. 

LITTLE-HANS CASE ANO CHILOHOOU EOUCATION. POSTSCRIPT. I909BI0/I4I 
A NOTE ON THE PREHISTORY OF THE TECHNIQUE OF ANALYSIS. 1920B1H/263 



GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THF 


EGO. 




192 1C 1 0/ 67 


GROUP PSYCHULUGY ANU 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


UF 


THE 


EGO. 




192 1C 10/ 69 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


LE-BON'S 




DESCRIPTION OF THE GROUP 


Ml NO. 










1 921 Cl 0/ 72 


GROUP PSYCHOLUGY ANU 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGU. 


OTHER 




ACCOUNTS OF COLLECTIVE MENTAL LIFE 










192 1C 1 0/ 02 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


UF 


THE 


EGO. 






SUGGESTION ANO LIBIDO 


1 . 












192 1C 1 B/ 00 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


TWO 




ARTIFICIAL GROUPS: THE CHURCH ANO 


THE 


ARMY. 




192 1C 1 0/ 93 


GROUP PSYCHULUGY ANO 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGU. 


FURTHER 




PROBLEMS ANO LINES OF 


WORK. 










1921C 10/100 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY* ANO 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 






IUENT1F ICATION. 














1921C10/ 105 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


tG(J. 


BEING IN 




LOVE ANO HYPNOSIS. 














192 1C 1 0/ 1 1 1 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


THE HERO 




INSTINCT . 














192 1C 10/11 7 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


THE GROUP 




ANO THE PRIMAL HOROE . 














192 1 Cl 0/1 22 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO . 


A 




DIFFERENTIATING GRAOE 


IN 


THE EGO. 










192IC1 0/129 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 


THE 


analysis 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 






POSTSCRIPT. 














1 92 1C 1 8/ I 34 



AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. HISTORY OF APPLIEO ANALYSIS. 1925020/ 62 



THE QUESTION OF LAY ANALYSIS. CONVERSATIONS WITH AN 
IMPARTIAL PERSON. 



THE 


QUEST 


ION 


OF 


LAY 


THE 


QUEST 


ION 


OF 


LAV 



1926E20/179 

1926E20/I63 

1926E20/191 



Tilt QUEST 1UN UF LAY ANALYSIS. I920L2Q/2OO 

THE QUESTION OF LAY ANALYSIS. 1926120/206 

THF QUESTIUN OF LAY ANALYSI S. 1926E2C/2IB 

THE QUESTIUN OF LAY ANALYSIS. I926E20/229 

THE QUESTION OF LAY ANALYSIS. 1926E20/239 

THF QUESTIUN OF LAY ANALYSIS. PGSTSCPlPT. 1927A20/25I 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AND INTERMINABLE. 1937C23/2Q9 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. SETTING A TIME 
LIMIT FOR TERMINATION. FACTORS WHICH MAY MAKE ANALYSIS 
INTERMINABLE. 1937C23/2I6 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AND INTERMINABLE. THE STRENGTH OF 

THE INSTINCTS VIS-A-VIS THE OTHER PSYCHICAL AGENCIES. 1937C23/224 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO I NT t RMl NABL E . PROTECTING 

AGAINST FUTURE CONFLICTS. I937C23/23C 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. ALTERATIONS Of 

THE EGO AFFECT PROGNOSIS. 1937C23/214 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE Atfo INTERMINABLE. CONSTITUTIONAL 

VARIABLES IN EGO. LlblOO ANO FREE AGGRESS IVENISS . 1937C23/24C 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AND INTERMINABLE. FACTUkS IN THE 

ANALYST AFFECT PROGNOSIS. 1937C23/24 7 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. BISEXUALITY IS 

THE STRONGEST RESISTANCE TO ANALYSIS. 193 7C23/250 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. THE ANALYST S TASK REQUIRES 
CONSTRUCTIUNS IN ANALYSIS. 1937023/255 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. EVALUATING THE PATIENT'S 

REACTIONS TO A CUNSTRUCTION. 1937023/260 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. THE 0 1 ST I NC T ION BE TWE E N 

HISTORICAL ANO MATERIAL TRUTH. 1937023/265 

PRIMARY PROCESSES - SLEEP ANO OREAMS; THE ANALYSIS OF 

OREAMS; DREAM CONSCIOUSNESS; FREUO S USE OF THE CONCEPT 

OF REGRESSION. 1950A 1/335 

ANALYST 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. FACTORS IN THE 

ANALYST AFFECT PRUGNOSIS. I937C23/247 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. THE ANALYST S TASK REQUIRES 
CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. 1937D23/255 

ANALYTIC 

JOKES ANU THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 

PART. 1905C B/ 9 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. JOKES ARE SIMILAR TO 

OREAMS. 1905C B/ 16 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. CONDENSATIONS ANO 

SUBSTITUTIVE FORMATIONS IN DREAMS. I905C 8/ 29 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 

PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. SUMMARY ANO PUNS. I905C 8/ 45 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALVT'C 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. PUNS: ABSUROITY AS h 

JOKE TECHNIQUE. H05C 8/ 47 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIUUS. ANALYTIC 

PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. RELATION OF JOKES TO THE 

COMIC: UNIFICATION AS A JOKE TECHNIQUE. 1905C 8/ 60 

JUKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UfJCONSC TUUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIUUE OF JOKES. REPRESENTATION BY 

OPPOSITE; CONCEPTUAL JOKES. I905C 0/ 70 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIOUE UF JOKES. ANALUGY AS A JOKE 

TECHNIQUE. I905C 0/ Bl 

JOKES ANO THtlR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 

PART. THE PURPOSES OF JOKES. INNOCENT JOKES; SMUT ANO 

THE PURPOSE OF JOKES. I905C 8/ 91 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. A ANALYTIC 
PART. THE PURPOSE OF JOKES. HOSTILE. CYNICAL ANO 

skeptical jokes. 1905C 0/102 

OBSERVATIONS ANO EXAMPLES FROM ANALYTIC PRACTICE. 1913H13/193 

1 NT RUOUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. ANALYTIC THERAPY. 1916X16/44B 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. CRITIQUE OF ANALYTIC LITERATURE ON 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. I93IB2I/240 

ANANKE 

ClVtLlZATlUN ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. TWO PILLARS UF 

CIVILIZATION: EROS ANO ANANKE. I930A21/ 99 



S»2 



r‘ 



isi 




« 



ANATOMICAL 



ANXIETY 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL AIM. 
ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 
AIMS. 


19050 7/149 


SOME PSYCHICAL CONSEQUENCES OF 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE SEXES. 


the 


ANATOMICAL 


1925J19/243 


SOME PSYCHICAL CONSEQUENCES OF 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE SEXES. 


THE 


ANATOMICAL 


I925J 19/248 


ANOREAS-SALOHE 








LOU ANOREAS-SALOHE. 






193 7A 2 3/29 7 


angewanoten 








PROSPECTUS FOR SCHRlFTEN ZUR ANGEWANOTEN SEELENKUNOE. 


1907E 9/248 



REPRESS! ON. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. UNOOINC ANO 
ISOLATION. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY IS A SIGNAL 
OF OANGEROUS SEPARATION. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY REPRODUCES 
FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. RELATION BETWEEN 
SYMPTOM FORMATION ANO ANXIETY. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. REPETITION IS THE 
CONSEQUENCE OF REPRESSION. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. MODIFICATION OF 
EARLIER VIEWS. 



ANGST 

ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETAChING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 

NEURASTHENIA under The description ANXIETY neurosis. 

the term angst '.no its English translation. 3/116 

ANIMAL 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOT EM ISM IN ChILOHOOO. 

ANIMAL PHOBIAS. SACRIFICIAL FEASTS. 1912x13/126 



ANIMALS 

three essays on the theory of sexuality, the sexual 

ABERRATIONS. OEVUTIONS IN RESPECT OF ThF SEXUAL 
OBJECT. INVERSION. SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 
ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS. 



19050 7/136 



ANIHISIH 

TOTEM ANO taboo, animisih. magic, omnipotence of 
thoughts, omnipotence of thoughts, totemism is a 

SYSTEM. 1912X13/ 85 



ANIMISM 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ANIMISM. MAGIC ANO THE OMNIPOTENCE OF 
THOUGHTS. ANIMISM. MAGIC. 



1912X13/ 75 



INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. SUPPLEMENTARY 
REMARKS ON ANXIETY. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY. PAIN ANO 
MOURNING. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. REPRESSION ANO 
OEFENCE- 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. ANXIETY 
ANO INSTINCTUAL LIFE. 

draft e. HOW anxiety originates. 

APPARATUS 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YIELO. 
THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS ANO THE EXTERNAL WORLD. 

THE functioning OF the apparatus: the paths of 
conduction: the experience of satisfaction: the 

EXPERIENCE OF PAIN: AFFECTS ANO WISHFUL STATES. 
APPLICATIONS 



ANNA-0 

STUDIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: FRAULEIN ANNA-0. 



new introductory lectures on psychoanalys »S . 

EXPLANATIONS. APPLICATIONS ANO ORIENTATION'.. 

18950 2/ 21 

APPROACH 



ANTI-SEMITISM 

A COMMENT ON ANTI-SEMITISM. 
ANT l-S :H IT I SM IN ENGLANO. 
ANTITHETICAL 



1938A2 3/287 
1938023/301 



the uncanny, linguistic approa .h to the uncanny. 

APPROACHES 

introductory lectures on psychoanalysis, dreams. 

DIFFICULTIES ANO FIRST APPROACHES. 



the antithetical meaning of prima- woros. 



191 OE 1 1/ 15 3 ARCHAIC 



ANXIETY 

ON The GROUNDS FOR DETACHING a PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 

neurasthenia unoer the description anxiety neurosis. 

the term angst ano its English translation. 3/116 

ON The GROUNOS FOR DETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER The DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE CLINICAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 1B95B 3/ 90 

ON the grounds for detaching a particular syndrome from 
neurasthenia unoer the description anxiety neurosis. 

INCIOENCE ANU AETIOLOGY of ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 1895b 3/ 99 

ON THE GROUNDS FOR OETAChING A PAR1ICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNUER THE OESCRIPT IUN ANXl ETY NEUROSIS. 

FIRST ST EPS TOWARDS A THEORY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS- 1895B 3/106 

ON THE GKUUNOS F)R OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNDROME FROM 
NEURASThENI' .'NO ER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

RELATION TO -.'HE* NEUROSES. 

A REPLY TO CRITICISMS OF MV PAPER ON ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE INTCRPR ET AT I ON UF DREAMS. THt PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAH PROCESSES. AROUSAL BY DREAMS - THE FUNCTION OF 
OREAMS - ANXIETY OREAMS. 

PREFACE TO WILHELM STEKEL'S NERVOUS ANXIETY STATES ANO 
THEIR TREATMENT . 



1895B 3/112 
1895F 3/121 

1900A 5/573 
190BF 9/250 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 
ARCHAIC FEATURES ANO INFANTILISM OF OREAMS. 

ARCHITECTURE 

ORAFT L. (ARCHITECTURE OF HYSTERIA.). 

ARGUMENTS 

beyond the pleasure principle, biological arguments for 
oeath instincts, summary. 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OlSCONTENTS. ARGUMENTS FOR AN 
INSTINCT OF AGGRESSION ANO DESTRUCTION. 

ARMY 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. TWO 
ARTIFICIAL GROUPS: ThE CHURCH ANO THE ARMY. 

AROUSAL 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAM PROCESSES. ARUUSAL BY OREAMS - THE FUNCTION OF 
OREAMS - ANXIETY OREAMS. 

ARTIFICIAL 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. TWO 
ARTIFICIAL GROUPS! THE CHURCH ANO THE ARMY. 



introductory lectures on psychoanalysis, general theory 

OF THt NEUROSES. ANXIETY. 

INHIBITIONS, symptoms ano ANXIETY. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. INHIBITIONS REFLECT 
RESTRICTIONS OF EGO FUNCT IONS . 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. SYMPTOMS REFLECT 
INTERSYSTEMIC CONFLICTS. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. RELATION OF EGO TO 
THE 10 ANO TO SYMPTOMS. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY. ANXIETY PRODUCES 
REPRESSION. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. OEFENSES OThFR THAN 



1916X16/392 
1926020/ 77 



ASSESSMENT 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. ASSESSMENT 
OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 



1926020/ 87 



ASSOCI AT IONS 

ASSOCIATIONS OF A FOUR-V EAR-OLO CHlLO. 



1926020/ 91 ATEN 



1926020/ 97 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MUSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. COMPARISON OF JEWISH ANO ATEN RELIGIONS. 



1926020/101 



ATTACKS 

SOME GENERAL REMARKS ON HYSTERICAL ATTACKS. 



$-3 



455-5B2 0 - 72 - 13 



o 

FRir 



192 



CONTINUATIO 
I 926020/ 111 

1926020/119 

1926020/12^ 

1926020/132 

1926020/144 

1926020/150 

1926020/157 

1926020/ 16A 

1926020/169 

1926020/173 

1933A22/ B1 
1950A 1/189 

1940A23/144 

1940A23/195 

1950A 1/312 

1<?33A22/136 
1V19H 17/219 

1916X15/ 83 

1916X15/199 
1950A 1/246 

1920G1 8/ 44 
1930A21/U7 

192 1C 18/ 93 

1900A 5/573 

192 1C 1 8/ 93 

1915E 14/196 
1920018/266 

1939A23/ 24 
1909A 9/227 



ATTACKS 



CON T I NUA T lOt tiOLOGICAL 



CUNTINUAT 10 



SKETCHES FOR THE PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION OF 1893. ON 

THE THEORY OF HYSTERICAL ATTACKS* 194IA 1/147 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL NOTE. 1901C 3/323 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTlA PARANOIOESI. 1911 C 1 2/ 3 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA IOEMENTIA PARANOIOESI. SCHRCBER. 1911C12/ 12 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON A AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF A 

CASE OF PARANOIA IOEMENTIA PARANOIOESI. ATTEMPTS AT 

INTERPRETATION. I9I1C12/ 35 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA IOEMENTIA PARANOIOESI. ON THE 

MECHANISM OF PARANOIA* 191 1C 12/ 5 9 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA IOEMENTIA PARANOIOESI. POSTSCRIPT. 1912A12/ 80 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. 1925020/ 3 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. PRE-ANALYT 1C PERIOO* 1925020/ 7 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. HYPNOSIS* HYSTERIA* ACTUAL 

NEUROSES* 1925020/ 19 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. BASIC THEORIES OF 

PSYCHOANALYSIS* 1925020/ 29 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 1925020/ AO 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY* COLLABORATORS. OCFECTORS ANO 

NEW INSTINCT THEORY. 1925020/ A B 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. HISTORY OF APPLIEO ANALYSIS. 1925020/ 62 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY* POSTSCRIPT. 1935A20/ 71 

AV ERBECK* S 

TWO SHORT REVIEWS* AVERBECK * S ACUTE NEURASTHENIA ANO 

HEIR MITCHELL'S NEURASTHENIA ANU HYSTERIA* 1BB7B 1/ 35 

B'NAI-R'RITH 

AOURESS TO THE SOCIETY OF B • NAI -B* RI TH. 19A1E20/271 

BEATEN 



A CHlLO IS 
THE ORIGIN 


BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION 
OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 


TO 


THE 


STUOY 


OF 


191 9E 17/ 175 


A CHlLO IS 

the origin 


BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION 
OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 


TO 


THE 


STUOY 


OF 


1919E 17/179 


A Cl !LO IS 
THE ORIGIN 


BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION 
OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 


TO 


THE 


STUOY 


OF 


1919E17/IB6 


A CHlLO IS 

the origin 


BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION 
OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 


TO 


THE 


STUOY 


OF 


191 9E 17/195 



BELIEF 

THE psychopathology uf everyoav life, oet ekminism, 

BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOME PUlNTS OF 
VIEW* 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF E VERYUAY LIFE* OETERMINISM* 
BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOME POINTS OF 
VIEW. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVER YOAY LIFE* OETERMINISM* 
BELIEF IN r HANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOME POINTS OF 
VIEW. 

BEFL IN 

PREFACE TO MAX EITINGON'S REPORT ON THE BERLIN 
PSYCHOANALYTICAL POLICLINIC. 

PREFACE TO TEN YEARS OF THE BERLIN PSYCHOANALYTIC 
INSTITUTE. 

REPORT ON FREUO S STUDIES IN PARIS ANO BERLIN. 
BERNHfcIM'S 

PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF BERNhEIM'S SUGGESTION. 
BIOGRAPHICAL 

LEUNAROO-OA-V INC I ANO \ MEMORY OF HlS CHlLOHGOO. 
BIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL. 

BIOLOGICAL 

THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 

The CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST OF THE 
NUN-PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES. THE PHILOLOGICAL* 
PHILOSOPHICAL ANO BIOLOGICAL INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. BIOLOGICAL ARGUMENTS FOR 
OEATH INSTINCTS. SUMMARY. 

FIRST PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE QUANTITATIVE CONCEPTION; 



190 IB 6/ 254 
190 IB 6/269 

1923G19/2BS 

I930B2 1/257 
1956A 1/ 3 

1BB8X 1/ 73 
1910C 1 1 / 63 



SECONO PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE NEURONE THEORY; THE 

contact-barriers; the biological standpoint; the 

PROBLEM OF QUANTITY: PAIN: THE PROBLEM OF QUALITY: 
CONSCIOUSNESS. 

BISEXUAL ITV 

HYSTERICAL PHANTASIES ANO THEIR RELATION TO 
BISEXUALITY. 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE* BISEXUALITY IS 
THE STRONGEST RESISTANCE TO ANALYSIS. 

BLISSFUL 

LEONAROO-OA-VINCI ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHIL0K300. THE 
BLISSFUL SMILES IN LEONARDO'S PAINTINGS. 

BONAPARTE'S 

PREFACE TO MARIE BONAPARTE'S THE LIFE ANO WORKS OF 
EOGAR ALLEN POE J A PSYCHOANALYTIC INTERPRETATION. 

BONOS 

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OE MONOLOG ICAL NEUROSIS. THE TWO 
BONOS. 

BOURKE'S 

PREFACE TO BOURKE'S SCATALOGIC RITES GF ALL NATIONS. 
BOY 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IV E-YE AR-OLO BUY. 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F I VE-VEAR-OLO BOY* CASE 
HlSTURY ANO ANALYSIS OF LITTLE-HANS* 

ANALYSIS UF A PHOBIA IN A FIVC-VEAR-OLO BOY. 
ILITTLE-HANSI* 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IV E-VE AR-OLO BOY. 
LITTLE-HANS CASE SHEOS LIGHT ON PHOBIAS* 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IVE-YEAR-OLO BOY* 
LITTLE-HANS CASE AND GHlLOHOOO EDUCATION. POSTSCRIPT* 

BRENT ANU*S 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENDIX: 
FRAN/ BRENTANU* S RIDDLES. 

BREUER 

JOSEF BREUER. 

BUNGLED 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVER YOAY LIFE. BUNGLtO ACTtUNS. 
BURGOMASTER 

LETTER TO THE BURGOMASTER OF PkIBOR. 

CALCULAT IONS 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE UREAM-MORK. SOME 
EXAMPLES. CALCULATIONS ANO SPEECHES IN OREAMS.. 



1901B 6/239 CASE 



1913J1 3/176 
1920018/ 44 



OBSERVATION OF A SEVERE CASE OF HEMl-ANAESTHESIA IN A 
HYSTERICAL MALE. 

A CASE OF SUCCESSFUL TREATMENT eY HYPNOTISM. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: FRAULEIN ANNA-0. 

STUDIES UN HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: FRAU EMhY-VON-N* 

STUDIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: MISS LUCY-R. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: KATHARlNA. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA* CASE HISTORIES: FRAULEIN 
EL ISABETH-VON-R. 

STUOIES GN HYSTERIA. APPEND I X A: THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE 
CASE OF FRAU EMMY-VON-N. APPENOIX B: LIST OF WRITINGS 
BY FREUD OEALING PRINCIPALLY WITH CONVERSION HYSTERIA. 

FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEUROPSV CHOSIS OF OEFENSE . 
ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF CHRONIC PARANUl A. 

FRAGMENT UF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE UF HYSTERIA. 

r kagment of an analysis of a case of hysteria. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 

CLINICAL PICTURE. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 
FIRST OREAM* 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 
SECONO OREAM. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. 
POSTSCRIPT* 



S-4 




O 

ER[C 



1950A 1/295 

190BA 9/157 
1937C23/250 

1910CI 1/107 

1933022/254 

1923019/ 93 

191 3K12/333 

I909B 10/ 3 

1909B10/ 22 
1 909 B1 0 '101 
I909B10/ 115 
1909 b 10/ 141 

1905C B/237 
1925G 19/279 
19018 6/162 
1931E21/259 

1900A 5/405 

18B60 1/ 23 
1B92Q 1/115 
1B950 2/ 21 
1B950 2/ 4B 
1B950 2/106 
1B950 2/125 

IB950 2/135 

1B950 2/307 

1696B 3/174 
1905E 7/ 3 

1905 E 7/ 7 

1905E 7/ 15 

1905E 7/ 64 

1905E 7/ 94 

1905E 7/112 



CASE 



C0NT1NUATI0 CHAKACTER 



ANALYSIS UF A PHOBIA IN A F IVE-YEAK-OLD BOY. CASE 

HlSIORY ANO ANALYSIS OF L1TTLE-HANS. 1909B10/ 22 

ANALYSIS UF A PHOBIA IN A F 1VE-YE AR-OLO BOY. 

LITTLE-HANS CASE SMEOS LIGHT ON PHOBIAS. 19D9B 10/1 IS 



ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F 1VE-YE AR-ULO BUY. 

L 1TTL E-HANS CASE ANO CHlLOHOOl) EOUCAUON. POSTSCRIPT. 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 

NUTES UPON A CASE OF JB SESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 

FROM The case history: the beginning of the treatment. 

INFANTILE SEXUALITY. I RAT-MAN) . 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. ThE GREAT OBSESSIVE FEAR. 
(RAT-MAN) . 

NUTES UPON A CASE OF UBSESSIONAL NEUKUS1S. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. INITIATION INTO THE NATURE OF 
THE TREATMENT. (RAT-MAN). 



19D9B10/U1 

1909U10/153 

1909010/156 

1909010/165 

190901(1/173 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEURUS1S. EXTRACTS 
FRUM THE CASE HISTORY. SUME UBSESSIONAL 1 UF AS ANO THEIR 
EXPLANATION. (RAT-MAN). 1909D10/1B6 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF UBSESSIONAL NEURUSIS.' EXTRACTS 

frum the case history, the precipitating cause of the 

ILLNESS . (RAT-MAN). 1909010/195 



NOTES UPON A CASE UF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FRCH THE CASE HISTORY. The FATHER COMPLEX ANO THE 

SOLUTION OF THE RAT 10EA. 1909010/200 

NUTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. THEORETICAL 

SECTION. SOME GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OBSESSIONAL 

STRUCTURES. 1909010/221 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEURUS1S. StHE 

psychological peculiarities of obsessional neurotics: 

THEIR ATTITUOE TOWAROS REALITY, SUPERSTITION ANU UEATH. l909UlO/229 



NUTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. INSTINCTUAL 
LIFE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS* ANO THE ORIGINS OF 

COMPULSION ANO DOUBT. 1909010/237 

PSYCHUANALYT 1C NOTES UN AN AUTUB 10GRAPH1 CAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA ( OEMENT1 A PARANOIOES). 19UC12/ 3 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NUTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA ( OEMENT I A PARANOIOES). SCHREBER. 1911C12/ 12 



PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON A AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCUUNT OF A 

CASE OF PARANOIA ( DEMENT 1 A PARANOIDES) . ATTEMPTS AT 

INTERPRETATION. 1 91 1C 1 2/ 35 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE UF PARANOIA (OEMENT1A PARANOIDES). UN THE 

MECHANISM OF PAR ANU 1 A. 19UC12/ 59 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NUTFS ON A*! AUTUBIOGRAPH 1CAL ACCOUNT UF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA « UEME NT 1 A PARANO 10ES ) . PUSTSCR1PT. 1912A12/ BO 



A CASE OF PARANOIA RUNNING COUNTER TO THE 

PSYCHOANALYTIC THEORY OF THE 01SEASE. 1915F14/261 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEURUS1S. GENERAL 

SURVEY OF THE PATIENT'S ENVIRONMENT AND OF THE HISTORY 

OF THE CASE. (WOLFMAN). 191BB17/ 13 



THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
WOMAN. 

THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
WOMAN. 

THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMUSEXUAL 1 T Y IN A 
WOMAN. 

THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HUMOSE XUAL 1 T Y IN A 
WOMAN. 

the expert opinion in the halsmann case. 

ORAFT F. COLLECTION 111. (TWO CASE HISTORIES.). 
LETTER 21. (TWO CASE HISTORIES.). 

NUTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. AODENDUM: 
ORIGINAL RECORU O'- THE CASE. (RAT-MAN). 



1920A1B/146 

1920A1B/155 

1920A1B/160 

1920A1U/167 
1931021/251 
1 950A 1/195 
1950A 1/199 

1 955A10/251 



NUTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIUNAL NEUROSIS. ORIGINAL 

RECORU OF THE C/*Sr. (RAT-MAN). 1955AI0/259 



CASKETS 

the theme of the three caskets. 



191 3F12/2B9 



CASTRATION 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. ANAL EROTISM 

\NO THE CASTRATION COMPLEX. IWOLFMAN). 191B817/ 72 

CENSORSHIP 

INTRODUCTORY lectures on psychoanalysis, dreams, the 

CENSORSHIP OF OREAMS. 1916X15/136 



THREE ESSAYS UN THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. T HE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. REASUNS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 
PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE PSYCHONEUROSES. INTIMATION OF 
THE INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SEXUALITY. 

CHARACTER ANO ANAL EROTISM. 

CHARACTER-TYPES 

SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 
THE EXCEPTIONS. 

SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 

thuse wrecked by success. 

some character-types met with in psychoanalytic work. 

CRIMINALS FROM A SENSE OF GUILT. 

CHARACTERISTICS 

THE 1 NTERPRE T M 1UN UF DREAMS. THE SC 1ENT I F 1 C L 1 TER ATURE 
DEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE DISTINGUISHING 

psycholug i cal characteristics of breams. 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIUNAL NEUROSIS. THEORETICAL 
SECTION. SUME GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OBSESSIONAL 
STRUCTURES. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCUNSC10US. THE SPECIAL 
CHARACTERISTICS OF ThE SYSTEM UCS. 

CHARACTERS 

PSYCHOPATHIC CHARACTERS ON THE STAGE. 



Charcot 

PREFACE TO THE TRANSLAT 1UN OF CHARCOT S LECTURES ON THE 
01SEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 

PREFACE ANO FOOTNOTES TO ThE TRANSLATION GF CHARCOT S 
TUESOAY LECTURES. 



Charcot. 



ChILO 

A CHILO IS BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUOY OF 
THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 



A CHILO IS BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUOY OF 
THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 

A CHILD IS BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF 
THE UK 1 GIN OF SEXUAL PERVERS1UNS. 



A CHILO is BEING BEATEN: a CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUOY OF 
THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 



ASSUC 1 AT 1 UNS OF A FOUR-V EAR-OLD CHlLU. 



CHlLOHOOD 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY LIFE. In! LSHOOO 
MEMORIES ANO SCREEN MEMORIES. 

THREE iSSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY: The PERIOO OF SEXUAL LATENCY IN CHlLOHOOO 
ANO ! TS INTERRUPTIONS. 

THHE i ESSAYS ON ThE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. The SEXUAL RESEARCHES OF CHl LOHGOO ■ 

Ai. .LYSIS of a phobia in a f i ve-year-olo boy. 

L k TTL E-HANS CASE ANO CHILDHOOD EDUCATION. POSTSCRIPT. 

LEONAROO-OA-V INC 1 ANO A MEMORY OF HlS CHlLUHOOO. 

LE OMAROO-O A- V INC 1 ANU A MEMORY OF HlS CHlLOHOOO. 
BIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL • 

LEONAR 00-0 A- VINCI ANO A MEMORY OF HlS CHlLOHOOO. 
LEONAROU'S CHlLOHOOO MEMORY. 

LE GNAROO-D A— V INC 1 ANO A MEMORY OF HlS CHILOHGOU . SEXUAL 
INTERPRETATION OF LEONARDO'S CMlLDHOUO MEMORY. 

LEONAROO-OA-V INC1 ANO A MEMORY OF HlS CHlLOHOOO. ThE 
BLISSFUL SMILES IN LEONARDO'S PAINTINGS. 

L EONARDO-UA- V INC 1 ANO A MEMORY OF HlS CHlLOHOOO. 
EFFECTS OF FATHEfc-LOSS ON LEONARDO. 

LEONAROO-U A- VlNC 1 ANO A MEMORY OF HlS CHILDHOOD. 
JUSTIFICATION OF PATHOBlOGRAPHY. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ThE RETURN OF TOT EM ISM IN CHlLOHOOO. 
THE NATURE OF TOTE Ml SM. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEM 1 SM IN CHlLOHOOO. 
ANIMAL PHOBIAS. SACRIFICIAL FEASTS. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ThE RETURN UF TOTEMlSM IN CHlLOHOOO. 
RELATION OF TOTEM MEALS TO FATHER ANO GOO. 

TOTEM ANO TABU . RETURN OF TOTEMlSM IN CHlLOHOOO. 
0E01PUS COMPLE) ANO SOCIETY. 

A CHlLOHOOO RECOLLECTION FROM 01CHTUNG UNO WAHRHE1T. 
LETTER 72. (RESISTANCES REFLECT CHlLOHOOO.) . 






184 



19050 7/170 
190BB 9/167 

1916014/31 1 
1916014/316 
1916014/332 

1 90 OA */ 4 0 

1909010/221 
1915E1 4/186 

1942A 7/305 

1BB6F 1/ 19 

1B92A 1/131 
1693F 3/ 9 

1919E 1 7/175 

191 9E 17/179 

1919E17/1B6 

191 9E 1 7/ 195 
192001 0/266 

1 90 IB 6/ 43 

19050 7/173 

19050 7/194 

1909B10/141 
19 IOC 1 1/ 59 

19 1 OC 11/ 63 

191 OC 11/ B2 

191 OC 1 1/ 93 

191 OC 11/ 107 

191 OC 1 1/119 

191 OC 1 1/130 

1 9 1 2X 1 3/ 100 

1912X13/126 

1912X13/140 

1912X13/155 
1917B17/145 
1 950A 1/266 




« 



child? 'ODD 

LETTER 97. (CHlLOHOOO ENURESIS. I. 
CHILDREN 



CONTINUATIO CLASSES 

I9S0A 1/275 THE ECO ANO ThC 10 . THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS. 
CLINICAL 



THE SEXUAL ENLIGHTENMENT OF CHlLOKEN. 
ON THE SEXUAL THEORIES OF CHILDREN. 



1907C 9/129 
I908C 9/205 



ON THE CROUNOS FOR OETAChING A PARTICULAR SYNOROHE FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNDER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE CLINICAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF INXlETY NEUROSIS. 



TABOO AND TOTEM. THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHlLOREN. 
THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM; THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY ANO ITS 
RELATION TO TOTEMISM. 

TWO LIES TOLO BY CHlLOREN. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. DREAMS. 

children s ureams. 



FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 
CLINICAL PICTURE. 

I9I2XI3/I08 

COGNITION 

I913GI 2/303 

INTRODUCTION OF THE EGO PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PROCESS 
IN PSl; COGNITION ANO REPRODUCTIVE THOUGHT! REMEMBERING 
1916X15/126 AND JUDGING* THOUGHT ANO REALITY. 



BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. REVIEW OF THE PLEASURE 
PRINCIPLE. TRAUMATIC NEUROSIS ANO CHlLOREN S PLAY ARE 
REPETITIONS. 1920GI8/ 7 

LETTER 73. ICHlLOREN S SPEECH OURING SLEEP.). I95DA 1/267 

CHOICE 

A SPECIAL TYPE OF CHOICE OF OBJECT MADE BY MEN. 

(CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 1910HII/163 

THE DISPOSITION TO OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. A CONTRIBUTION 

TO THE PROBLEM OF CHOICE OF NEUROSIS. 191 31 12/31 1 

LETTER 125. (CHOICE OF NEUROSIS. I. I950A 1/279 



COl TUS“IN TERR UP TUS 

LETTER 14. ( COITUS- IN TERR UP TUS AS AN AETIOLOG ICAL 
FACTOR. I . 

COLLABORATORS 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. COLLABORATORS. OEFECTORS ANO 
NEW INSTINCT THEORY. 

CDLLFCTION 

DRAFT F. COLLECTION III. ITWOCASE HISTORIES. I. 
COLLECTIVE 



CHRISTMAS 

DRAFT K. ThE NEUROSES OF DEFENCE. (A CHRISTMAS FAIRY 
TALE.). 



GROiiP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. OTHER 
ACCOUNTS OF COLLECTIVE MENTAL LIFE. 

1950A 1/220 COMB INEO 



CHRONIC THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY LIFE. COMBlNEO 

PARAPRAXES. 

FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEUROPSYCHOSIS OF DEFENSE. 

ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF CHRONIC PARANOIA. IB96B 3/174 COMIC 



CHRONOLOGY 

STUDIES UN HYSTERIA. APPENDIX A: THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE 

CASE OF FRAU EMMY-VON-N . APPENOIX B: LIST OF WRITINGS 

PY FREUD OEALING PRINCIPALLY WITH CONVERSION HYSTERIA. 18950 

Church 



JOKES AND THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. RELATlDN OF JOKES TO THE 
COMIC; UNIFICATION AS A JOKE TECHNIQUE. 

2/307 JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JUKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COPIC. 



GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. TWO 
ARTIFICIAL GROUPS: THE CHURCH ANO THE ARMY. 



jokes ano their relation to the unconscious, theoretic 

PART. JOKES ANO the SPECIES OF THE COMIC. PSYCHICAL 
192 1C 1 8/ 93 LOCATION DISTINGUISHES JOKES FROM THE COMIC. 



CIVILIZATION 

THE future of an illusion, civilization rests upon 

RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCTUAL WISHES. 1927C21/ 

the future of an illusion, relations between 

CIVILIZATION ANO RELIGION. I927C2I/ 



JOKES AND THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES ANT THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. DIFFERENCES 
BETWEEN JOKES ANO COMIC. 

3 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 

part, jokes ano the species of the comic, comic things 

34 are NOT PROPER IN JOKES) RELATION OF HUMOUR TO JOKES. 



CIVILIZATION ANO ITS DISCONTENTS. 



D30A21/ 59 COMMUNICATION 



CIVILIZATION AND ITS OISCONTENTS. MAN«S NEEO FOR 
RELIGION ARISES FROM FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 



STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. ON THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF 
1930A2 1/ 64 HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA* PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION. 



CIVILIZATION AND ITS OISCONTENTS. MAN COPES WITH 

unhappiness through oiversion« substitution ano 
intoxication. 

CIVILIZATION ano ITS OISCONTENTS. MAN S CONFLICT WITH 
CIVILIZATION: LIBERTY VERSUS EQUALITY. 

CIVILIZATION AND ITS OISCONTENTS. TWO PILLARS OF 
CIVILIZATION: EROS AND ANANKE. 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. SECURITY AT THE COST 
OF RESTRICTING SEXUALITY ANO AGGRESSION. 



PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. 
COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THE TWO SYSTEMS. 

I930A2I/ 74 

SKETCHES FOR THE PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION OF 1893. ON 

the theory of hysterical attacks. 

1930A2I/ 86 

COMPARISON 

1930A21/ 99 MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. COMPARISON OF JEWISH ANO ATEN RELIGIONS. 

1930A2 1/108 COMPLEX 



CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. ARGUMENTS FOR AN 
INSTINCT OF AGGRESSION ANO DESTRUCTION. 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. OEVELDPMENT OF THE 
SUPEREGO ANO ITS SEVERI TV. 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. CONCLUSIONS ABOUT 
EFFECTS OF CIVILIZATION UPON PSYCHE. 

CIVILIZED 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
1930A2 1/117 FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE FATHER COMPLEX AND THE 
SOLUTION OF THE RAT IDEA. 

1930A 21/12 3 TOTEM ANO TABOO. RETURN OF TOTEMISM |N CHlLOHOOO. 
OEDIPUS COMPLEX ANO SOCIETY. 



1930A21/I34 FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS . ANAL EROTISM 
ANO THE CASTRATION COMPLEX. IWOLFMANt. 



CIVILIZEO SEXUAL MORALITY ANO MOOERN NERVOUS ILLNESS. 
CLAIMS 



the dissolution of the oedipus complex. 

19080 9/177 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. FEMALE OEOIPUS COMPLEX OlFFERS FROM 
MALE. 



THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 

THE psychological interest of psychoanalysis. 

the claims of psychoanalysis TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 
the claims of psychoanalysis to the interest of the 

NON-PSYCHOLOG I CAL SCIENCES. ThE PHILOLOGICAL* 
PHILOSOPHICAL AND BIULOGICAL INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

The claims of psychoanalysis to scientific interest, 
the claims of psychoanalysis to the interest of the 

NON-PSYCHOLOG I CAL SCIENCES. THE INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS FROM A DEVELOPMENTAL POINT OF VIEW. 



LETTER 71. lUNI VERSAL IT Y OF OEOIPUS COMPLEX.). 

191 3 J 1 3/1 65 

COMPULSION 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. INSTINCTUAL 
LIFE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS. ANO THE ORIGINS OF 
COMPULSION ANO DOUBT. 

1913J13/I76 

PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF HYSTERIA: HYSTER ICAL COMPUL S I ON : THE 
GENESIS OF HYSTERICAL COMPULSION. 

CONCEPT 

1913J1J/1B2 

PAPERS ON MET APSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

JUSTIFICATION FOR ThE CONCEPT OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 



O 

ERIC 



192 3B 1 9/ 40 

I895B 3/ 9D 
190SE 7/ 15 

I950A 1/322 

I9S0A I/I84 

1925020/ 46 
1 95 OA I/I9S 

192 1C 18/ 82 

1V0IB 6/230 

I905C 8/ 60 
I905C 8/ 1 8 I 

I905C 8/199 

1905C 8/208 

1905C 8/221 

1893A 2/ I 
I915E14/I90 
194 I A 1/147 

1939 A2 3/ 24 

1909010/ 20D 

1912X13/155 

1918B17/ 72 
1924D 19/173 

1 93 1 B2 1/2? 3 
I950A 1/263 

1909010/237 
1950A 1/347 

I9I5EI4/166 



195 



CONCEPT 



I932C22/2 1 9 



CON1INUATIO CONTACT 



PttlMARV PROCESSES - SLEEP AND DREAMS; THE ANALYSIS OF 
DREAMS ; OKEAM CONSCIOUSNESS; FREUD S USE OF 1HE CONCEPT 
UF REGRESSION. 

CONCEPTION 

FIRST PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE QUANTITATIVE lONCEPTION; 
SECOND PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE NEURONE THEORY; THE 
CON TACT- BARRIERS; THE BIOLOGICAL STANDPOINT; THE 
PROBLEM OF QUANTITY; PAlN; THE PROBLEM OF QUALITY; 
CONSCIOUSNESS. 

CONCEPTUAL 



MY CONTACT WITH JOSEF POPPE R-LVNKEUS . 

I950A 1/315 CONTACT-BARRIERS 

FIRST PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE QUANTITATIVE CONCEPTION; 
SECOND PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE NEURONE THEORY; THE 
CONTACT-BARRIERS; THE BIOLOGICAL STANDPOINT; THE 
PROBLEM OF QUANTITY; PAIN * THE PROBLEM OF QUALITY; 
CONSCIOUSNESS. 

I 950A 1/295 CONTROL 

THE ACQUISITION AND CONTROL OF FlRE. 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TU THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. REPRESENTATION BY 
OPPUSITE; CONCEPTUAL JOKES. 



CONVERSAT (UNS 



I905C 8/ 70 



THE QUESTION OF LAV ANALYSIS. CONVERSATIONS WITH AN 
IMPARTIAL PERSON. 



CONCLUSIONS 



CONVERSION 



CIVILIZATION ANO ITS 01 SCONTENTS. CONCLUSIONS ABOUT 

effects of civilization upon psyche. 

CONDENSATION 

THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE UREAM- WORK J THE WORK 
OF CONDENSATION. 



1 9 3 0 A 2 1 /I 34 



I900A 9/2/9 



STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. HVSIERICAL CONVERSION. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. APPENDIX A: THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE 
CASE OF FRAU EMMV-VON-N. APPENDIX B: LIST OF WRITINGS 
BY FREUO DEALING PRINCIPALLY WITH CONVERSION HYSTERIA. 

COPES 



CONDENSATIONS 

JOKES AND THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 

part, the technique of JOKES, condensations and 

SUBSTITUTIVE FORMATIONS IN DREAMS. 



CIVILIZATION ANO ITS DISCONTENTS. MAN COPES WITH 

unhappiness through diversion, substitution and 

INTOXICATION. 

8/ 29 

COST 



CUNOIT IONS 

ON NARCISSISM. OISCUSSION OF NARCISSISM IN VARIOUS 
CONDITIONS. 



CIVILIZATION AND ITS DISCONTENTS. SECURITY AT THE COST 
OF RESTRICTING SEXUALITY ANO AGGRESSION. 

I9I9CI9/ 73 

COUNTER 



CONOUCT ION 

the functioning of the apparatus; the paths of 
conduct ion: the experience of satisfaction; the 
EXPERIENCE OF PAIN; AFFECTS AND WISHFUL STATES. 

CONFL ICT 



A CASE OF PARANOIA RUNNING COUNTER TO THE 
PSYCHOANALYTIC THEORY OF THE DISEASE. 

1950A 1/312 CREATIVE 

CREATIVE WRITERS AND CAY-DREAMING. 



CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. MAN S CONFLICT WITH 

civilization: liberty versus equality. 

CONFL ICTS 



CRI 1INALS 

1930621/ 86 CHAKACIER-ITPES MEI MlIH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC MIRK. 

CRIMINALS FROM A SENSE OF GUILT . 



INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. SYMPTOMS REFLECT 
1NTERSYSTEMIC CONFLICTS. 



I926D20/ 91 



CRITICISMS 

A REPLY TO CRITICISMS OF MV PAPER ON ANXlElV NEUROSIS. 



ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AND INTERMINABLE. PROTECTING 
AGAINST FUTURE CONFLICTS. 



1937C23/230 INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. DREAMS. 
UNCERTAINTIES ANO CRITICISMS. 



CONSCIENCE 

TOTEM ANO TABOD. TABOC AND EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TABOO UPON THE DE AO . TABOD AND CONSCIENCE. 

CONSCIOUSNESS 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. UNCONSCIOUS IDEAS ANO IDEAS 
INADMISSIBLE TO CONSCIOUSNESS - SPLITTING OF THE MIND. 



CRI TICS 

1912X13/ 51 THE MOSES OF MICHELANGELO. DESCRIPTION OF CRITICS. 

CR IT 10UE 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. CRITIQUE OF ANALYTIC LITERATURE ON 
1B95D 2/222 FEMALE SEXUALITY. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY CF THE 
ORE AM PROCESSES. THE UNCONSCIOUS ANO CONSCIOUSNESS 
REALITY. 

THE EGO AND THE 10 . CONSCIOUSNESS ANO WHAT IS 
UNCONSCIOUS. 



1900A 5/610 



I 923619/ 12 



CYNICAL 

jukes ano their relation to the unconscious, a analytic 

PART. THE PURPOSE OF JDKES. HOSTILE. CYNICAL AND 
SKEPTICAL JOKES. 

DANGEROUS 



FIRST PR1NC. L THEOREM: THE QUANT IT A T 1 VF CONCEPTION; 
SECONO PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE NEURONE THEORY; THE 
CONTACT-BARRIERS; THE BIOLOGICAL STANDPOINT; THE 
PROBLEM UF QUANTITY; PAlN; THE PROBLEM OF QUALITY; 
CONSCIOUSNESS. 

PRIMARY PRUCESSES - SLEEP AND DREAMS; THE ANALYSIS OF 
OREAMS? OREAM CONSCIOUSNESS; FREUO S USE OF THE CONLEPT 
OF REGRESSION. 

CONSEQUENCE 



INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY. ANXIETY IS A SIGNAL 
OF OANGERDUS SEPARATION. 

1/295 OAY- ORE AM 1NG 

CREATIVE HR 1 TF°^ AND DAY-DREAMING. 

1/335 OAY-UREAMS 

INTRODUCTION TO J. VA«ENDGNCK*S THE PSYCHOLOGY OF 
OAV-OREAMS. 



INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. REPETITION IS THE 
CONSEQUENCE OF REPRESSION. 

CONSTITUTIONAL 



1926D20/150 OEAO 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO AND EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TABOO UPON THE OEAO. TABOO ANO CONSCIENCE. 



ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. CONST 1 1 UT 10NAL 
VARIABLES IN EGO. LIBIDO AND FREE AGGRESSIVENESS. 

CONSTRUCTION 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. EVALUATING THE PATIENT'S 
REACTIONS TO A CONSTRUCTION. 

CONSTRUCTIONS 



1937C23/290 



1937023/260 



OEATH 

THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL DREAMS. OREAMS OF THE OEATH OF 
PERSONS OF WHOM THE DREAMER IS FUNO. 



IOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEURUSIS. SOME 
SYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS: 



CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. THE ANALYST S TASK REQUIRES 
CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. EVALUATING THE PATIENT'S 
REACTIONS TO A CONSTRUCTION. 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN 
HISTORICAL ANO MATERIAL TRUTH. 



1937D23/255 

1937D23/260 

1937D23/265 



THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR ANO OEATH. THE 
OISILLUS10NMENT OF THE WAR. 

THO <TS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR ANO OEATH. OUR ATTlTUOE 
TOWAROS OEATH. APPENDIX: LETTER TO OR. FREDERIK 
V ANEEOEN • 

BEVONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. SPECULATIONS ON THE 



S7 



1 950A 1/295 
I932A22/I85 

1926E20/179 
1R95U 2/203 
18950 2/30 7 

I930A2 I / 79 

I930A2 I/IOB 

191 5F 19/26 I 
I90BE 9/191 

19 I 6D l 9/332 

1B95F 3/121 
1916X15/22 B 

1919813/209 
1931 H2 1/290 

I9C5C B/ 102 

I926D20/12* 
I90BE 9/191 

192 IB 1 8/2 7 1 

1912X13/ 51 

1 900A 9/29 B 

I909D1 0/22 9 
I915B19/275 

I915BI9/2B9 



1E6 




OEATH 



CONTlNUATlO DEPARTURES 



OEATH INSTINCT. 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. BIOLOGICAL ARGUMENTS FOR 
DEATH INSTINCTS. SUMMARY. 

DEBASEMENT 

ON THE UNIVERSAL TENDENCY TO DEBASEMENT IN THE SPHERE 
OF LOVE. (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHULOGY Uf LOVE). 

OEFEC TORS 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. COLLABORATORS. OEFECTURS Af.O 
NEW INSTINCT THEORY. 

OEFENCE 

THE NEUROPSYCHOSES OF OEFENCE. APPENDIX: THE EMERGENCE 
OF FREUO S FUNDAMENTAL HYPOTHESES. 

THE NEUROPSYCHOSES OF OEFENCE. 

FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEUROPSYCHOSES UF DEFENCE. THE 
SPECIFIC AETIOLOGY OF HYSTERIA. 

FURTHER REMARKS UN THE NEUROPSYCHOSIS OF DEFENCE. THE 
NATURE AND MECHANISM OF UBSESSIUNAL NEURUSIS. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. RFPRESSIUN ANO 
OEFENCE. 

SPLITTING OF THE EGO IN THE PROCESS UF OEFENCE. 

ORAFT K. THE NEUROSES OF OEFENCE. (A CHRISTMAS FAIRY 
TALE.) . 

PATHULOr.lCAL OEFENCE THE HYSTERICAL PROTON PSEUOOS 
OE TFRHl N iNT S OF THE (PROTON PSEUOUS) UlSTURBANCE OF 

thought by affect. 

UEFENSE 

FURTHER REMARKS UN THE NEUROPSYCHOSIS OF UEFENSE. 
ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF CHRONIC PARANOIA. 

LETTER 66. (DEFENSE AGAINST MEMORIES. I. 

OEFENSES 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. OEFENSES OTHER THAN 
REPRESSION. 

OE JA-RACONT E 

F AUSSE-RECONNAI SSANCE ( OE JA-R ACUNT E ) IN PSYCHOANALYTIC 
TREATMENT . 

OELUSIONS 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN* S GRAOIVA. 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. SYNOPSIS OF 
JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. 

OELUSIUNS ANO OREAMS IN JEN SEN'S GRAOIVA. GRAOIVA ANO 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. RELATIONS 
BETWEEN OREAMS ANO OELUSIONS. 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. TREATMENT OF 
The OELUSIUNS IN GRAOIVA. postscript to The secono 
EOIT I UN. 

OE ME NT I A 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). 

psychoanalytic notes on an autobiographical account of 

A CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). SCHREBEP. 

PSYCHUANALVT 1C NOTES CN A AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF A 
CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). ATTEMPTS AT 
INTERPRETATION. 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOB lUGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIDES). ON THE 
MECHANISM OF PARANOIA. 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NUTES UN AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). POSTSCRIPT. 

OEMONOLOGI CAL 



1920G1B/ 24 
1920G1B/ 44 

1912U1 1/177 

1925020/ 4 B 

3/ 62 
1B94A 3/ 43 

10960 3/162 

1096b 3/16B 

192 <*020/173 
1940E23/271 

1 96 0 A 1/220 
1950A 1/351 



1B96B 3/174 
1960A 1/267 



1926020/111 

1914A1 3/201 

190 7 A 9/ 3 

1907A 9/ 7 

1907A 9/ 41 
1907 A 9/ 64 

19C7A 9/ 67 

191 1C 1 2 / 3 

191 1C 12/ 12 

19IIC12/ 36 

191IC12/ 59 
1 91 2 A 1 2 / BO 



AS FAT HER- SUBS T 1 TUTt . 



BONOS. 



OEMONOLOG 1CAL 


NEUROSIS. 






1923019/ 


69 


OEMONOLOG 1CAL 

The painter. 


NEUR0S1 S. 


THE 


STORY 


1923019/ 


73 


OjMONOLOGICAL 


NEUROSIS. 


THE 








1*H THE OEVIL. 








19230 19/ 


79 


OE MONOLOG I CAL 


NEUROSIS. 


The 


DEVIL 


192JI 19/ 


B3 


OF MONO LOG I CAL 


NEUROSIS. 


THE 


TWO 


1923019/ 


93 


OEMONOLOG ICAL 
NEUROSIS. 


NEUROSIS. 


THE 




1923019/ 


00 



ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. 
DEPARTURES OF JUNG ANO AOLER. 

OEPENOtNT 

the ego ano The id • the oepenoent relationships of the 

EGO. 

OESCARTES 

SOME OREAMS OF OESCARTES! A LETTER TO MAXImE LEROY. 
OESTRUCT I UN 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. ARGUMENTS FUR AN 
INSTINCT UF AGGRESSION ANU DESTRUCTION. 

DETACHING 

ON THE GROUNDS FOR OET ACHING A PARTICULAR SVNOROME FRUM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER TH t DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE TERM ANGST ANO ITS ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 

ON THE GROUNDS FOR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEURUSIS. 

THE CLINICAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

ON THE GRUUNDS FOR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNORUHE FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNDER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

I NCIOENCE AND AETIOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

ON THE GRUUNDS FOR UETACHlNG A PARTICULAR SVNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
FIRST STEPS TOWAROS A THEORY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

ON THE GROUNDS FUR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNDROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
RELATION TO OTHER NEUROSES. 

OEI ERHINANTS 

LETTER 55. (DETERMINANTS OF PSYCHOSIS.). 

PATHOLOGICAL OEFENCE THE HYSTERICAL PROTON PSEUDDS 
DETERMINANTS OF THE (PROTON PSEUOOS) DISTURBANCE OF 
THOUGHT BY AFFECT. 

OET ERMINISM 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYUAY LIFE. OET ERMlNTSH, 
BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERS TIT! UN - SOME PCfNTS UF 
VIEW. 

the psvchupathologv uf evervoay life, determinism, 

BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOME POINTS OF 
VIEW. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERVOAY LIFE. OE T ERMINISM, 
BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOME POINTS OF 
VIEW. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THIRO LECTURE. PSYCHIC 
OET ERMINISM, OREAMS. ANO PARAPRAXES. 



DEVELOPMENT 



STUDIES ON HYSTERIA. INNATE DISPOSITION 
OF HYSTERIA. 



DEVELOPMENT 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. The phases of development of the sexual 
ORGANIZATION. 

1NTR0UUC TURY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIB 100 ANO Thi 
SEXUAL ORGANIZATIONS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

of the neurosis, some thoughts on development and 

REGRESSION - AETIOLOGY. 

CIVILIZATION ano its uiscuntents. development of The 
SUPEREGU ANO ITS SEVERITY. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MUSES, H’S PEOPLE 

ANO MONOTHEIST religion, the historical development. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlND ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE OEVELUPMENT OF THE SEXUAL FUNCTION. 

DEVELOPMENTAL 

THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 

the claims of psychoanalysis to the interest of the 
non-psvchological sciences, the interest of 

PSYCHOANALYSIS FROM A OE VEL UPMENTAL POINT OF VIEW. 

OE Vl AT IONS 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL 
OBJECT. 'NVERSIUN. SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 
ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS. 

three essays on the theory of sexuality, thf sexual 

ABERRATIONS. OEVlATlONS IN RESPECT OF ThE SEXUAL AIM. 
ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 
AIMS. 



S-8 



1914014/ 42 

1923B19/ 4B 
1929B21/199 

1930A21/117 

3/116 
1895B 3/ 90 
1B95B 3/ 99 
IB95B 3/106 
1 095 B 3/112 
1950A 1/240 
1950A 1/351 

1 90 IB 6/239 
190 IB 6/254 

190 IB 6/269 

1 9 1 DA 11/ 29 

1B95U 2/240 

19050 7/197 

1916X16/320 

1916X16/339 
1930421/123 
1939A23/132 
194 OA 2 3/1 52 

191 3J13/1B2 

19050 7/136 
1905O 7/149 



1S7 



OfcVll 



01 SSECII ON 



CONI INUAf 1 0 



A SfcVEf ” FENT H-CEHTURY OEMONOLUGICAL NEUROSIS. THE 
MOTIVE FOR THE PACT WITH ThE OEV IL . 


1923019/ 79 


A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OEMONOLOG ICAL NEUROSIS. THE DEVI! 

AS father-substitute. 


1923019/ B3 


OI ANA 




GREAT IS OI ANA UF THE EPHESIANS. 


191 IF 12/342 


Oi FF ERE NT I AT I NG 




GRUUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. A 
differentiating GRAOE IN THE EGO. 


I921CI 6/129 


DIFFERENTIATION 




THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUOERTY. THc DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN 
MEN ANO WUMEN. 


IS05U 7/219 


01FFERS 




FEMALE SEXUALITY. FEMALE OEOIPC' COMPLEX OIFFERS FROM 
MALE. 


1931B21 *223 


DIFFICULTIES 




INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSI S i OREAMS. 
DIFFICULTIES mNO FIRST APPROACHES. 


1916X15/ B3 


MOSES ANO MJNOTHEISH* THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. DIFFICULTIES. 


I939A23/ 92 


OISCONTENTS 




CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. 


I930A2I/ 59 


CIVILIZATION ANO 1 T S OI SCONTENT S. MAN'S NEEO FOR 
RELIGION ARISES FROM FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 


I930A2I/ 64 


CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. MAN COPES WITH 

unhappiness through oiversion. substitution ano 

INTOX ICAT ION. 


I930A21/ .4 


CIVILIZATION ANO ITS 01 SCONTENTS. MAN S CONFLICT WITH 
CIVIL IZAT IUN* LIBERTY VERSUS EQUALITY. 


I930A21/ B6 


CIVILIZATION AIO US OISCONTENTS. TWO PILLARS OF 
CIVILIZATION* EROS ANO ANANKE. 


I930A21/ 99 


CIVILIZATION ANO I TS OI SCONTENT S. SECURITY AT ThE COST 
OF RESTRICTING SEXUALITY ANU AGGRESSION . 


I930A21/I0B 


CIVILIZATION ANO 1 T S 01 SCONTENTS. ARGUMENTS FOR AN 
INSTINCT OF AGGRESSION ANO DESTRUCTION. 


1930A21/II7 


CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. OEVELOPMENF OF THE 
SUPEREGO ANO ITS SEVERITY. 


1930A21/I23 


CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS* CONCLUSIONS ABOUT 
EFFECTS OF CIVILIZATION UPON PSYCHE. 


I930A2 1/ I 3* 


OISCUSS IONS 




FROM THE HISTORY OF Afi INFANTILE NEUROSIS* A FEW 
OI SCUSSION S. ( WOLF MAN) ■ 


I91BB17/ 4B 


oisease 




ON NARCISSISM. NARCISSISM IN OP.GANIC OISEASE. 
HYPOCHONOR lA. ano EROTIC LIFE. 


191404/ B2 


A CASE OF PARANOIA RUNNING COUNTER TO T HE 

psychoanalytic theory of the oisease. 


191 5F 14/26 1 


oiseases 




preface to the translation of CHARCOT s lectures on the 
OISEASES OF ThE NERVOUS SYSTEH. 


IBB6F 1/ 19 


The INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. ThE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH ThE PROBLEMS OF DREAMS. ThE RELATIONS 
BETWEEN OREAMS AtlO MENTAL OISEASES. 


1900A 4/ BB 


01 SILLUSIUNMENT 




THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR ANO OEATH. ThE 
DISILLUSIONMENT OF ThE WAR. 


1915B14/275 


OI SOROERS 




PREFACE TO MAXIM STEINER'S ThE PSYCHICAL OI SOROERS OF 
MALE POTENCY. 


I 91 3E 12/345 


DISPLACEMENT 




THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. ThE OREAM-WORK* ThE WORK 
OF DISPLACEMENT. 


1900A 4/305 


DISPOSITION 




STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. INNATE DISPOSITION - Of YELOPMENT 
OF HYSTERIA. 


1B950 2/240 


THE DISPOSITION TO OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. A CONTRIBUTION 
TO THE PROBLEM OF CHOICE OF NEUROSIS. 


1913112/311 



01 S SEC T ION 



o* section or the psychical personality. 

01SSCLUT ION 

THE DISSOLUTION OF ThE OEOlPUS COMPLEX. 

01 ST INGUIShES 

jokes ano their relation to the unconscious* theoretic 

PAKf. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF ThE COMIC. PSYCHICAL 
LOCATION distinguishes jokes from the comic. 

OISTINGUISHI NG 

THE interpretation of oreams. The scientific literature 

OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE DISTINGUISHING 

psycholugical characteristics of oreams. 

01 ST ORT ION 

THE INTERPRETATION Of oreahs. distortion in oreams. 
DISTURBANCE 

THE PSYCHOANALYTIC VIEW OF PSYCHOGENIC DISTURBANCE OF 
VI SION. 

A DISTURBANCE OF MEMORY ON THE ACROPOLIS. 

pathglugical DEFENCE The hysterical proton pseuoos 
OETEHMINANTS OF The IPROTON PSEUOOS) disturbance of 
thought by affect. 

oi veksi on 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. MAN COPES WITH 
UNHAPPINESS THROUGH OIVERSION. SUBSTITUTION ANO 
INTOXICATION. 

OOSTOCVSKY 

OOSTOEVSKY ANO PARRICIOE* 

OOSTOEVSKY ANO PARRICIOE. 

OOSTOEVSKY ANO PARRICIOE. A LETTER FROM FREUO TO 
THEOOOR RE IK. 

DOUBT 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. INSTINCTUAL 
LIFF. OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS. ANO ThE ORIGINS OF 
COMPULSION ANO OOJBT . 

OOUBTS 

LETTER 6'. IOOUBTS ABOUT THEORY OF NEUROSES*). 

OR AFT 

ORAFT A. (AETIOLOGY OF ACTUAL NEUROSES. I . 

OR AF T B* THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES. 

ORAFT 0. ON THE AETIOLOGY ANO THEORY OF THE MAJOR 
NEUROSES. 

ORAFT E. HOW ANXIETY ORIGINATES 

ORAFT F. COLLECTION III. (TWO CASE HISTORIES. )• 

ORAFT G. MELANCHOLIA. 

ORAFT H. PARANOIA. 

ORAFT I. MIGRAINE* ESTABLISHED POINTS* 

ORAFT J* FRAU-PJ. UGEO 27). 

ORAFT K* THE NtJROSES OF OEFENCE . I A CHRISTMAS FAIRY 
TALE.)* 

ORAFT L* (ARCHITECTURE OF HYSTERIA.). 

ORAFT M. (REPRESSION IN HYSTERIA. I* 

ORAFT N. (IMPULSES. FANTASIES ANO SYMPT0M5*I. 

OREAM 

The interpretation of oreams. the methoo of 

INTERPRETING OREAHS* AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAM. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE METHOO OF 
INTERPRETING OREAMS* AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAM 
I PREAHCL E ANO OREAM). 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS* A OREAM IS TF 2 
FULFILLMENT OF A WISH. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAM PROCESSES. REGRESSION. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. ThE PSYCHOLOGY OF ThE 
OREAM PROCESSES. WISH FULFILLMENT. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAM PROCESSES. AROUSAL BY OREAMS “ THE FUNCTION OF 
QBE AMS - ANXIETY OREAMS. 



NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS* Th^ PSYCHOLOGY OF ThC 
S-9 



I93JA22/ 5 7 
I9240I9/I 73 



I905C B/199 



I90QA 4/ «B 
I900A A/ 1 3* 

1 9 101 D/209 
I936A22/239 

1 950 A 1/351 



I930A21/ 74 

192BB2I/17S 
I92BB2 1/ 1 7 7 

192BB21/195 



1909010/237 

1950A 1/260 

1950A 1/177 
1950A 1/179 

. ,50A 1/IB6 
I ’50 A 1/1B9 
195l A 1/195 
195GA 1/200 
1950A 1/206 
1950A 1/214 
I950A 1/215 

I950A 1/220 
19S0A 1/24 B 
I950A 1/250 
19S0A 1/254 



1900A 4/ 96 

1900A 4/106 
1900A 4/122 
I900A 5/533 
I900A 5/550 

1900A 5/573 



•198 



OREAH 



CONTINUAIIO ORE AH I NG 



DREAM PROCESSES. THE PRIMARY ANO SECONOAKV PROCESSES - 
KEPI.es S |0S . 


1900a 5/500 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAH PROCESSES. THE UNCONSCIOUS ANO CONSCIOUSNESS * 
REALITY. 


1900A 5/610 


FRAGMENT OF an analysis of a case of hysteria, the 
FIRST OREAH. 


I905E 7/ 64 


FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 
SECONO OREAH. 


1905E 7/ 94 


AN EVIOENT ML OREAH. 


I9I3A12/267 


FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE OREAH 
ANO THE PRIMAL SCENE. IWOLFNAN) . 


191BB1 7/ 29 


REMARKS ON THE THEORY ANO PRACTICE OF OREAH 
INTERPRETATION. 


1923C 19/100 


REMARKS ON THE THEORY ANO PRACTICE OF OREAH 
INTERPRETATION. 


192 3C 19/11 3 


REMARKS ON THE THEORY ANO PRACTICE OF OREAH 
INTERPRETATION. 


I923C19/U0 


SOME AOOITIONAL NOTES ON OREAH INTERPRETATION AS A 
WHOLE. THE LIMITS TO THE POSSIBILITY OF 
INTERPRETATION. 


1 9251 19/1 25 


SOME AOOITIONAL NOTES ON OREAH INTERPRETATION AS A 
WHOLE. MORAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE CONTENT OF OREAHS. 


I 925119/131 


SOME A001T lOtlAL NOTES ON OREAH INTERPRETATION AS A 
WHOLE. THE OCCULT SIGNIFICANCE OF UREAMS. 


1925119/135 


AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE NINO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. ORTAM INTERPRETATION AS AN ILLUSTRATION. 


1940A2 3/ ) 6 5 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. APPENOIX A: A PREMONITORY 

ORE AN FUIF:LLE0. APPENOIX 01 LIST OF WRITINGS BY FREUO 

OEALING PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY WITH OREAHS. 1 94 1C S/623 



LETTER 22. IOREAH AS ANALOGY TO 0*S OREAM PSYCHOSIS. 1. 19S0A 1/213 



LETTER SO. (FUNERAL OREAM.I. 


1950A 1/233 


LETTER 60. IOREAH ABOUT FL1ESS.I. 


1950A 1/245 


PRIMARY PROCESSES - SLEEP ANO OREAHS; THE ANALYSIS OF 
OREAHS; OREAH CONSCIOUSNESS! FREUO S USE OF THE CONCEPT 

OF regression. 


1950A 1/335 


OREAM-INTERPKETATION 




papers on technique, the hanoling of 
□ream-interpretation in psychoanalysis. 


19UE12/ 09 


oreah-processes 




THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAN-PROCESSES. THE FORGETTING OF OREAHS. 


1900A 5/509 


ORE AM- THOUGHTS 




INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOTHERAPY. OREAPi. THE 
MANIFEST CONTENT OF OREAHS ANO THE LATENT 
OKEAM-THOUGHTS. 


1916X15/113 


ORE AM-WORK 




THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE DREAM-WORK: THE WORK 
OF CONDENSATION. 


I900A 4/279 


THE INTERPRETATION OP OKEAMS. THE OREAN-WORK. THE WORK 
OF DISPLACEMENT. 


1900A 4/305 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE ORE .K-WURK. THE h'ANS 
OF REPRESENTATION IN OREAHS. 


1900A 4/310 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OFEAHS. THE ORFAh-WOKK. 
CONSIDERATIONS OF REPRFSENTAB1L ITV. 


1900A 5/339 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE OREAH-WORK. 
REPRESENTATION BY SYMBOLS IN OREAHS - SOME FURTHER 
TYPICAL OREAHS. 


1900A 5/35 0 


THE INTERPRETATION OF UREAMS. THE OREA.M- WORK . SOME 
EXAMPLES. .ALCULAT10NS ANO SPEECHES IN OREAHS. 


I900A 5/405 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE OREAM-WORK. ABSURO 
OREAHS - INTELLECTUAL ACTIVITY IN OREAMS. 


1900A 5/426 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. AFFECTS 
IN OREAHS. 


I900A 5/460 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAN-WORK. SECONDARY 
REVI SION. 


1900A 5/400 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 
OREAM-WORK. 


I916XIS/1 70 


OREAHER 




THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL DREAMS. DREAMS OF THE OEATH OF 
PERSONS OF WHOM THE OREAHER IS FONO. 


I900A 4/240 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 

IN OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAHS. THEORIES OF 

OREAHING ANO ITS FJNCTION. |<>OOA 4/ 75 

OREAHS 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. A/ XT 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 

OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAHS* THE RELATION OF 

OREAHS TO WAKING LIFE. 1900A 4/ 1 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 

OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAHS. THE MATERIAL OF 

OfiEANS - MEMORY IN OREAHS. 1900A 4/ II 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAHS. THE STIMULI ANO 



SOURCES OF OREAMS. 


I900A 


4/ 22 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. WHY OREAMS ARE 
FORGOTTEN AFTER WAKING. 


I900A 


4/ 43 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAHS. THE DISTINGUISHING 
PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OREAHS. 


I900A 


4/ 4B 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE MORAL SENSE IN 
OREAMS. 


I900A 


4/ 63 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
IN OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THEORIES OF 
OREAHING ANO ITS FUNCTION. 


1900 A 


4/ 75 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OcALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAHS. THE RELATIONS 
BETWEEN OREAMS ANO MENTAL OISEASES. 


1900A 


4/ 00 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE METHOO OF 
INTERPRETING OREAHS: AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAH. 


1900 A 


4/ 96 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. PREFACE TO THE FIRST ♦ 
SECONO# THIRO* FOURTH* FIFTH* SIXTH* EIGHTH COITIONS 
ANO THIRO (REVISEOI ENGLISH EOITION. 


1 900 A 


4/XX 1 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE METHOO OF 
INTERPRETING OREAMSt AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAH 
(PREAMBLE ANO OREAH). 


1900A 


4/106 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. A OREAH IS THE 
FULFILLMENT OF a WISH. 


1900A 


4/122 


THE INTERPRE -iTION OF OREAMS. DISTORTION IN OREAHS. 


1900A 


4/136 


THE INTERPRETATION OF ORLAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. RECENT ANO INO IFFERENT MATERIAL IN OREAMS. 


I900A 


4/163 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OnEAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. INFANTILE MATERIAL AS A SOURCE OF OREAMS. 


1900A 


4/109 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAHS. THE SOMATIC SOURCES OF OREAMS. 


1900A 


4/221 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL OREAMS: EHBABASSING OREAMS OF BEING 
NAKEO. 


1900A 


4/242 


THE* INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAHS. TYPICAL DREAMS. ORLAMS OF THE OEATH OF 
PERSONS OF WHOM THE OREAMcR IS FONO. 


I9C0A 


4/24 0 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL OREAHS. OTHER TYPICAL OREAMS. 


1900A 


4/271 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAHS. TYPICAL OREAHS. EXAMINATION OREAMS. 


1900A 


4/273 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK: THE WORK 
OF CONDENSATION. 


I900A 


4/279 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. THE WORK 
OF DISPLACEMENT. 


1900A 


4/305 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE OREAM-WORK. (HE MEANS 
OF REPRESENTATION IN DREAMS. 


I900A 


4/310 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE OREAM-WORK. 
CONSIDERATIONS TF REPRE SENTABIL ITV . 


1900A 


5/339 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. 
REPRESENTATION BY SYMBOLS T N OREAMS - SOME FURTHER 
TYPICAL OREAMS. 


1900A 


5/350 


THF INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. SOME 
EXAMPLES. CALCULATIONS ANO SPEECHES IN OREAMS. 


1900A 


5/405 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS* THE OREAM-WORK. ABSURO 
OREAMS - INTELLECTUAL ACTIVITY IN OREAMS. 


1 900A 


5/426 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. AFFECTS • 
IN OREAMS. 


1900A 


S/460 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAN-WORK. SECONOARY 
REVISION. 


1900A 


5/40 B 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAN-PROCESSES. THE FORGETTING OF OREAHS. 


1900A 


5/509 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 







r' 




±93 



$.10 



ORLAMS 

DREAM PROCESSES. REGRESSION. 

IHE I NTER°RE T A?! ON OF OREAHS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAH PROCESSES. WISH FULFILLMENT. 

the interpretation of okeahs. the psychology of the 

OR*: AM PROCESSES. AROUSAL BY DREAMS - THE FUNCTION OF 
OREAMS - ANXIETY OREAMS. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF uRE AMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF Tht 
ORE AF* PROCESSES. THE PRIMARY ANO SECONDARY PROCESSES - 
REPRESSION. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
ORfAM PRCCCSSES. THE UNCONSCIOUS ANO CONSCIOUSNESS - 
RE ALI TY. 

ON OREAMS. PARTS I ANO II. 

ON OREAMS. PARTS MI ANO IV. 

ON OREAMS. PARTS V ANU VI. 

ON OREAMS. PARTS VII* VIII* IX ANU X. 

ON DREAMS. PARTS XI* XII ANO XIII. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCIINSC I OUS . ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. JOKES ARE SIMILAR TO 
OREAMS. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. CONDENSATIONS ANO 
SUBSTITUTIVE FORMATIONS IN OREAMS. 

jokes ano their relation to the unconscious, theoretic 

PART. THE RELATION OF JOKES TO OREAMS ANO TO THE 
UNCONSCIOUS. 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. SYNOPSIS OF 
JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. GRAOIVA ANO 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. RELATIONS 
BETWEEN OREAMS ANO OELUSIONS. 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. TREATMENT OF 
THC DELUSIONS IN GRAOIVA. POSTSCRIPT TO THE SECONO 
EOI TION. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. ThIrO LECTURE. PSYCHIC 
DETERMINISM* OREAKS* ANO PARAPRAXES. 

THE OCCURRENCE IN OREAMS OF MATERIAL FROM FAIRY TALES. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. 
DIFFICULTIES ANO FIRST APPROACHES. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 
PREMISSES ANO TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOTHERAPY. OREAMS. ThC 



CONTINUATIO OREAMS 

1 90 OA 5/533 WHOLE. ThC OCCULT SIGNIFICANCE OF OREAMS. 

SOME OREAMS OF DESCARTES; A LETTER TO MAXlME LEROY. 



1900A 5/550 

1900A 5/573 

1900A 5/588 

I900A 5/610 
1 90 1 A 5/631 
I901A 5/64? 
190 I A 5/654 
1901 A 5/666 
1 90 1 A 5/678 

1905C 0/ 16 

1905C 8/ 29 

I905C 8/159 
190 7 A 9/ 3 

1907 A 9/ 7 

190 7 A 9/ 41 

1907A 9/ 64 

1907A 9/ 87 

1 9 1 0 A 1 1/ 29 
1913012/279 

1916X15/ B3 

1916X15/100 



NFl INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. REVISION 

nr the theory of oreams. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS ANO 
OCCULT ISM. 

THb INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. APPENOlX A; A PREMONITORY 
OKEAM FULFILLED. APPENOlX «: LIST OF WRITINGS 8V FRLUO 
OEALING PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY WITH DREAMS. 

LETTER 64. I TWO DREAMS. I • 

LETTER 84. (DREAMS ANO PHYLOGENESIS.). 

PRIMARY PROCESSES - SLECP AND OREAMS: THE ANALYSIS OF 
OREAMS: DREAM CONSCIOUSNESS; FREUO S USE OF THE CONCEPT 
OF REGRESSION. 

OREAMS IN FOLKLORE (FREUD ANO OPPENHEIM). 

OYNAMIC 

THE EGO ANO THE 10 . THE 0ESCR1PTIVE ANO THE OYNAMIC 
UNCONSCIOUS. THE GREAT RESERVOIR OF LIBIOO. 

OYNAMIGS 

PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. THE DYNAMICS CF TRANSFERENCE. 

PAPERS ON META PSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. TOPOGRAPHY 
ANO 0YNAM1CS OF REPRESSION. 

ECONOMIC 

ThE ECONOMIC PROBLEM OF MASOCHISM. ^ 

E01TQRIAL 

editorial changes in the jeitschrift. 

E0UCAT10N 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A FIVE- VE4R-0L0 BOV. 
LIULE-HANS CASE ANO CHILOHOOO EDUCATION. POSTSCRIPT. 



EGO 



GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO ThL ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. LE-BON' S 

DESCRIPTION OF THE GROUP MIND. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY A.>lO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. OTHER 
ACCOUNTS OF COLLfcC :VE MENTAL LIFE. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY AND THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. 
SUGGESTION A.'D LIBIOO. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY AND THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. TWO 
ARTIFICIAL GROUPS; THE CHURCH ANO THE ARMY. 



CONI INUAT 10 
1925119/135 
1929B21 / 199 

I933A2?/ 7 

I933A22/ 31 

1 94 1C 5/623 
1950A 1/253 
I9S0A 1/274 

1950A 1/335 
I957A12/175 

1923019/ 60 

1912012/ 97 
1 9 15C 14/100 

I924C 1 9/ 15 7 

I924H19/293 

1909B10/ 14 l 

1 92 1 C 10/ 67 
192 1C 1 0/ 69 

1 92 ICI 0/ 72 

192 I Cl 8/ 82 

1921C1B/ B8 

192 1C IB/ 93 



MANIFEST CONTENT OF OREAMS AND THE LATENT 
ORE AH- THOUGHTS. 




1916X15/113 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 
PROBLEMS ANO LINES OF 


The analysis 

WORK. 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


FURTHER 


1921C1B/100 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES 
CHILOREN S OREAMS. 


ON 


PSYCHOAN ALYS I S. 


OREAMS. 




1916X15/126 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 
IDENTIFICATION. 


THE 


ANALVS IS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 






192 1 Cl 0/ 105 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES 
CENSORSHIP OF OREAMS. 


ON 


PSYCHOANALVS IS. 


OREAMS. 


the 


1916X15/136 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 
LOVE ANO HYPNOSIS. 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


BEING IN 


1 92 1 C 1 8/ 111 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES 
SYMBOLISM IN OREAMS. 


ON 


PSYCHOANALYSIS. 


DREAMS . 




1916X15/149 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 
INSTINCT. 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


the 


EGO. 


THE 


HERO 


1 92 1C 18/15.7 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES 
OREAM-WORK. 


ON 


PSYCHOANALYSIS. 


OREAMS. 


THE 


1916X15/170 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 
ANO THE PRIMAL HOROE. 


the 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


THE 


GROUP 


1 92 1C 1 8/122 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 
ANALYSES OF SAMPLE DREAMS. 


OREAMS. 


SOME 


1916X15/184 


GROUP Pf YCHOLOGY ANO 

differentiating graoe 


the 

IN 


ANALYSE 
THE EGO. 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


A 




1921 Cl 8/ 12 9 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES 
ARCHAIC FEATURES ANO 


ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. 
INFANTILISM OF OREAMS. 


THE 


1916X15/199 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO 
POSTSCRIPT. 


THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


The 


EGO. 






192 1 Cl B/ 134 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES 
FULF ILLMENT. 


ON 


PSYCHOANALYSIS. 


DREAMS. 


WISH 


1916X15/213 


THE EGO ANO THE 10 . 
















1923B19/ 3 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 
UNCERTAINTIES ANO CRITICISMS. 


OREAMS. 




1916X15/22 B 


the ego ano the io . 

UNCONSCIOUS. 


consciousness ano what is 




1923019/ 12 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES 


ON 


PSVCHOANALYSI S. 


INOEX OF 




THE EGO ANO THE 10 . 
















192 3B 19/ 19 



PAPERS ON ME TAPSYCHOLOGY. A MET APSVCHOL OGICAL 
SUPPLEMENT TO THE THEORY OF OREAMS. 

OREAMS ANO TELEPATHY. 

OREAMS ANO TELEPATHY. 

OREAMS ANO TELEPATHY. 

JOSEF POPPER-LVNKEUS ANO THE THEORY OF OREAMS. 

SOME A001TI0NAL NOTES ON OREAM INTERPRETATION AS A 
WHOLE. MORAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE CONTENT OF OREAMS. 

SOME AOOITIONAL foOTES ON OREAM INTERPRETATION AS A 



1917014/219 
192 2A 10/196 
1922A10/2OO 
1922A1 8/208 
192 3F19/26 1 

1925119/131 



THE EGO ANO THE 10 
I EGO- IOEAL ) * 

the ego ano the io . the two classes of instincts. 

THE EGO ANO THE 10 . THE OEPENOENT RELATIONSHIPS OF THE 
EGO. 

THE EGO ANO THE 10 . THE OESCAIPTIVE ANO THE OYNAMIC 
UNCONSCIOUS. THE GREAT RESERVOIR OF LIBIOO. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. INHIBITIONS REFLECT 
RESTRICTIONS OF EGO FUNCTIONS. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIET*. • RELATION OF EGO TO 
THE 10 ANO TO SYMPTOMS. 



1923019/ 28 
192 3B 19/ 40 

1923B 19/ 4B 

1923B1 9/ 60 

1926020/ 07 

1926020/ 97 



r' 



$-11 



o 

ERIC 



200 



ECO 



CONTINUATIO ENGLISH 



ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. ALTERATIONS OF 

THE EGO AFFECT PROGNOSIS. I937C23/234 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. CONS1 ITUT IONAL 

VARIABLES IN EGO. LIBIOO ANO FREE AGGRESSIVENESS. I937C23/240 

SPLITTING OF THE EGO IN THE PROCESS OF OFFENCE. I940E23/27I 

INTRODUCTION OF THE EGO PRIMARY ANO SECONDARY PROCESS 

IN PSI; COGNITION ANO REPRODUCTIVE THOUGHT: REMEMBERING 

anu juoging: thought ano reality. I95oa 1/322 

EGO-IOEAL 

ON NARCISSISM. EGO-IOEAL . INHERITOR OF NARCISSISM. I9I4CI4/ 92 

The EGO ANO THE 10 . THE EGO ANO THE SUPEREGO 

IEGO-IOEALI. I923BI9/ 2B 

EGYPTIAN 



MOSES ANO 


MONOTHEISM: 


three 


ESSAYS. 


MOSES AN 


EGYPTIAN. 


I939A23/ 


7 


MOSES ANO 


monotheism: 


three 


ESSAYS. 


IF 


MOSES 


WAS 


AN 






EGYPTIAN: 


IF MOSES WAS AN EGYPT * AN. 


MOSES INTROOUCEO AN 






EXCLUSIVE 


REL I G I ON . 














I939A23/ 


17 


MOSEL ANO 


MONOTHEISM: 


three 


ESSAYS. 


IF 


MOSES 


WAS 


AN 






EGYPTIAN. 


COMP AR ISON 


OF JEWISH ANO 


ATEN RELIGIONS 


• 


I939A23/ 


24 


MOSES ANO 


monotheism: 


THRFE 


ESSAYS. 


IF 


MOSES 


H S 


AN 






EGYPTIAN. 


two goos ano two moses. 










I939A23/ 


30 


MOSES ANO 
EGYPTIAN. 


monotheism: 


1 HR EE 


ESSAYS. 


IF 


MOSES 


WAS 


AN 


I939A23/ 


36 


MDSES ANO 


monothEI Sm: 


THREE 


ESSAYS. 


IF 


HOSES 


WAS 


AN 






EGYPTIAN. 


ONE HUNOREO 


YEARS 


OF mISTOaY 


SUPPRESSED 


6 


I939A23/ 


41 


MUSES ANO 


MONOTHE ISh: 


THREE 


ESSAYS. 


IF 


MOSES 


WAS 


AN 






EGYPT IAN. 


the muroer 


OF hose 


( t 










I939A23/ 47 



EINSTEIN 

HHY WAR? 2 LETTER FROM EINSTEIN. 

EIT INGON'S 

PREFACE TO MAX EIT INGON'S REPORT ON THE BERLIN 
PSYCHOANALYTICAL POLICLINIC. 



193 3R22/I99 



I 923G19/2B5 



ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHlNG A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER U>E DESCRIPTION ANXIET.' NEUROSIS. 

THE TERM ANGST ANO US ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. PREFACE TO THE FIRST. 
SCCONOi THIRO. FOURTH. FIFTH. SIXTH. EIGHTH COITIONS 
ANO THIRO (REVISEO) ENGLISH EOlTION. 

ENL IGHTENMENT 

THE SEXUAL ENL IGHT CNMENT OF CHlLOREN. 

ENURESIS 

LETTER 97. IChILOHOOD ENURESIS.). 

ENVIRONMENT 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. GENERAL 
SURVEY OF THE PATIENT'S ENVIRONMENT ANO OF THE HISTORY 
OF THE CASE. IWOLF MAN ) • 

EPHESIANS 

GREAT IS 01 AN A OF THE EPHESIANS. 

EQUALITY 

CIVILISATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. MAN S CONFLICT WITH 

civilisation: liberty versus equality. 



EROS 



CIVILISATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS 
CIVILISATION: EROS ANO ANANKE. 



EROTIC 



TWO PILLARS OF 



ON NARCISSISM. NARCISSISM IN ORGANIC OISEASE. 

HYPOCHONOR I A . ANO EROTIC LIFE. 

ER'JflSM 

CHARACTER ANO ANAL EROTISM. 

ON TRANSFORMATIONS OF INSTINCT AS EXEMPLIFIED IN ANAL 
EROTISM. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. ANAL EROTISM 
ANO THE CASTRATION COMPLEX. (UOLFMAN). 



ELECTRICAL 

INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE WAR NEUROSES. 
MEMORANDUM ON THE ELECTRICAL TREATMENT OF WAR 

ne unoucs. 

EL ISA BETH- VON- A 

STUDIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: FRAULEIN 
ELI SABETH-VON-R. 

EMBARASSING 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL OREAMS: FMBARASS I NG OREAMS OF BEING 
NAKEO. 

EMMV-VON-N 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: FRAU EHMY-VON-N. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. APPENOIX A: THE CHRONOLOGY OF THE 
CASE OF FRAU EMMV-VON-N. APPENOIX B: LIST OF WRITINGS 
BY FREUD OEALING PRINCIPALLY WITH CONVERSION HYSTERIA. 

EMOTIONAL 



1955C 1 7/211 



IB950 2/135 



I900A 4/242 



IB950 2/ 46 



IB950 2/307 



EROTOGENIC 

THREE ESSAYS IT*. THE 'HEQRY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. COMPONENT INS.INCTS ANO EROTOGENIC ZONES. 

LETTER 75. IEROTOGENIC ZONES.). 

ERRORS 

the psychopathology of everyoay life, errors. 

ESSAYS 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. APPENOIX; LIST 
OF WRITINGS BY FREUO DEALING PREDOMINANTLY OK LARGELY 
WITH SEXUALI TV. 

three essays on the theory of S! duality. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL 
OBJECT. INVERSION. SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 
ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL AIM. 
ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 



TOTEM 


ANO 


TABOO. 


TABOO 


ANO 


EMOT IONAL 


AMBIVALENCE (I). 


1912X13/ IB 


AIMS. 
















TOTEM 


ANO 


TABOO. 


TABOO 


ANO 


EMOTIONAL 


AMBIVALENCE. 




three essays 


ON 


THE 


Theory of 


s 


1 T V • 


THE 


SEXUAL 


PARALLEL BETWEEN 


TABOO 


ANO 


OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 


1912X13/ 26 


aberrations. 


THE 


PERVERSIONS 


IN 


.FRAL. 






TOTEM 


ANO 


TABOO. 


TABOO 


ANO 


EMOTIONAL 


AMBIVALENCE. THE 




THREE ESSAYS 


ON 


THE 


theory of 


St 


iJALITY. 


THE 


SEXUAL 


TREATMENT 


OF ENEMIES. 








1912X13/ 35 


ABERKATION S. 


THE 


SEXUAL INSTINCT 


IN NEUROTICS 


• 


TOTEM 


ANO 


TABOO. 


TABOO 


ANO 


EMOT IO.YAL 


AMBIVALENCE. THE 




THREE ESSAYS 


ON 


!h£ 


theory of 


SFXUALI TV. 


THc 


SEXUAL 


TABOO UPON 


RULERS 


i 6 








1912X13/ 41 


ABERRATIONS. 


COHPONE NT INSTINCTS 


AND EROTOGENIC 20NES. 


TOTEM 


ANO 


TABOO. 


T A BOO 


ANO 


EMOT IONAL 


ambivalence. The 




Three essays 


ON 


the 


theory of 


SEXUALITY. 


The 


SEXUAL 


TABOO 


UPON 


THE OEAO. TABOO 


ANO CONSCIENCE. 


1912X13/ 51 


ABERRATIONS. 


REASONS 


FOR THE i 


APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 



EMOTIONS 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGV. T HE UNCONSCIOUS. UNCONSCIOUS 
EMOTIONS. 

ENCYCLOPEDIA 

TWO ENCYCLOPEDIA ARTICLES. PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

TWO ENCYCLOPEO I A ARTICLES. THE LIBIOO THEORY. 

ENEMIES 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TREATMENT OF ENEMIES. 

ENGL ANO 

ANTI-SEMITISM IN EN5LAN0. 



PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE P SVCMONEUROSES 
THE INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SEXUALITY. 



INTIMATION OF 



19I5EA4/I77 



1923A1B/234 
1923 Ai 8/255 



1912X13/ 35 



I93B023/30I 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXJALITV. INFANTILE 
sexuality: THE PERIOO OF SEXUAL LATENCY IN CHILOHOOO 
ANO ITS INTERRUPTIONS. 

three essays on the theory of sexuality, infantile 

SEXUALITY. THE MANIFESTATIONS OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THcORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL AIM OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. MASTURBATORY SEXUAL MANIFESTATIONS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEX’ALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL RESEARCHES CHILOHOOO. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE ThFORY P* SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 



S12 



o 

ERIC 



£0i 



i/I 16 
1 90 OA 4 /XXI 
I907C 9/129 
I 950A i/275 

1 9 1 80 17/ 13 
I9IIF 12/34? 

I930A2I/ B6 

I930A2 I / 99 

19I4CI4/ B2 

19080 9/16/ 
191 7C 17/125 
1 91 BBI 7/ 72 

19050 7/167 
I950A I/26B 

I90IB 6/217 

7/244 
19050 7/125 

19050 7/136 

190*0 7/149 
19050 7/160 
1 9050 7/163 
19050 7/167 

19050 7/170 

19050 7/173 
19050 7/179 
19050 7/IB3 
19050 7/IBS 
19050 7/194 



i. 



ESSAYS 

SEXUALITY. THE PHASES OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL 
ORGANIZATION. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SOURCES OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

three essays un the theory cf sexuality, the 

TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE PRIMACY OF THE GENITAL 
ZONES ANO THE FORE-PLEASURE. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THF 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PJOCRTV. THF PROBLEM OF SEXUAL 
EXCITATION. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PjBERTY. THE LIBIDO THEORY. 

three essays on the theory of sexuality, the 

TRANSFURMAT IONS OF PUBERTY. THc DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN 
MEN ANO WOMEN. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE FINOING OF AN OBJECT. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. SUMMARY. 

PREFACE TO SANOOR FERENCZI S P SYC HOANAL YSI S I ESSAYS IN 
THE FIFLO OF PSYCHOANALYSIS.) 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEI SMI THREE ESSAYS. A NOTE ON THE 
TRANSCRIPTION OF PROPER NAMES. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHETSMI THREE ESSAYS. MOSES AN EGYPTIAN. 

MOSES ANP MONO THE I SMI THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN! IF MOSES WAS AN EGYPTIAN. MOSES INTROOUCEO AN 
EXCLUSIVE RELIGION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEI SHl TH...E ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. COMPARISON OF JEWISH ANO ATEN RELIGIONS. 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEI SMI THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. TWO GOOS ANO TWO MOSES. 

MOSES ANO MONUTHEISMI THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. U'JE HUNQREO YEARS OF HISTORY SUPPRESSED. 

MUSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. THE HUROER OF MOSES. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION: PREFATORY NOTES I UlENNAl C 
II (LONOON). 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL PREMISS. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE LATENCY PERIOO ANO 
TRAOITION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE ANALOGY. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. APPLICATION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. DIFFICULTIES. * 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS RELIGION 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. SUMMARY ANO RECAPITULATION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. HOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE GREAT MAN. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO HONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE AO VANCE IN 
intellectuality. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCT. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE. 
ANO HONOTHEIST RELIGION. WHAT IS TRUE IN RELIGION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE RETURN OF THE REPRESSEO. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO HONOTHEIST RELIGION. HISTORICAL TRUTH. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM* THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT. 

ESTABLISHMENT 

PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THt c M8LISHMENT OF THE FACTS IN 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. 

PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FACTS IN 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. 



continuatio evaluating 

19050 7/197 
19050 7/200 



CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. EVALUATING THE PAT IENT* S 
REACTIONS TO A CONS IRUCT ION . 



EWALO 



19050 7/207 

19050 7/212 
19050 7/217 



PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGV. THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPFNOlX A! 
FREUO ANO EWALO HERIMG. APPENOIX B : P SVC HO-PMYS ICAL 
PARALLELISM. APPENOIX C: WOROS ANO THINGS. 

EXAMINAT ION 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL OREAMS. EXAMINATION OREAMS. 

EXAMPLE 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE PRACTICAL TASK. AN 
EXAMPLE OF PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 



19050 7/219 EXAMPLES 



19050 7/222 
19050 7/231 

19108 9/252 

1939A23/ 3 

1939A2 3/ 7 

1939A2 3/ 17 
1939A23/ 2* 
1939A23/ 30 
I939A23/ 36 
I939A2 3/ 41 
19 39A2 3/ *7 

1939A2 3/ 54 
1939A23/ 59 

1939A23/ 66 
1939A23/ 72 
1939A2 3/ 80 
I939A23/ 92 
1939A23/103 
1939A23/105 
1939A23/107 

1939A23/U 1 
1939A23/U6 
1939 A2 3/122 
1939A23/124 
1939A 2 3/12 7 
1939A2 3/132 

I906C 9/ 99 
1906C 9/103 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAH-MORK. SOME 
EXAMPLES. CALCULATIONS ANO SPEECHES IN OREAMS. 

OBSERVATIONS ANO EXAMPLES FROM ANALYTIC PRACTICE. 

EXCEPTIONS 

SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 

THE EXCEPTIONS. 

EXCITAT ION 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PU8ER1Y. THE PROBLEM OF SEXUAL 
EXCITATION. 

EXCITATIONS 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. I NT ERACERE8RAL TONIC EXCITATIONS - 
AFFECTS. 

EXCLUSIVE 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. IF HOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN: IF MOSES WAS AN EGYPTIAN. MOSES INTROOUCEO AN 
EXCLUSIVE RELIGION. 

EXOGAMY 

TA800 ANO TOTEM. THE RETURN OF TOT EM I SM IN CHILOREN. 

THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMI SM; THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY ANO ITS 
RELATION TO TOTEMISM. 

EXPERIENCE 

A RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE. 

IHE FUNCTIONING OF THE APPARATUS? THE PATHS OF 
CONOUC T IONS THE EXPERIENCE OF SATISFACTION? THE 
EXPERIENCE OF PAIN? AFFECTS ANO WISHFUL STATES. 

EXPLANATION 

NOTES UPON A case of obsessional neurosis, extracts 

FROM THE CASE HISTORY. SOME OBSESSIONAL IOEAS ANO THEIR 
EXPLANATION. (KAT-MANI. 

EXPLANATIONS 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 
EXPLANATIONS. APPLICATIONS ANO ORIENTATIONS. 

EXTENSIONS 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL AIM. 
ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 
AIMS. 

EXTERNAL 

an outline of psychoanalysis, the theoretical yielo. 

the PSYCHICAL APPARATUS ANO THE EXTERNAL WORLO. 

EXTRACT 

THE RESISTANCES TO PSYCHOANALYSIS. APPENOIX! EXTRACT 
FROM SCHOPENHAUER'S THE WORLO AS WILL ANO IOEA. 

THE UNCANNY. APPENOIX: EXTRACT FROM DANIEL SANOER'S 
WORTERBUCH OER OE^SCHEN SPRACHE. 

EXTRACTS 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY* THE BEGINNING OF THE TREATMENT. 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY. (RAT-MAN). 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE GREAT OBSESSIVE FEAR. 
(RAT-MAN) • 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. INITIATION INTO THE NATURE OF 
THE TREATMENT. (RAT-MAN). 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. SOME OBSESSIONAL IOEAS ANO THEIR 
EXPLANATION. (RAT-MAN). 



1937023/260 

IB9 18 14/205 

I900A 4/273 

I940A23/IB3 

1900 A 5/405 
191 3Hl 3/193 

19160 14/311 

19C50 7/212 
18950 2/192 

1939A2V 17 

1912X1 3/IOB 
192BA2 1/167 
1950A 1/312 

1909010/1B6 

1933A22/136 

19050 7/149 

1940A23/19S 

19/223 
19 19H1 7/253 

1909010/158 
1909010/165 
1909010/173 
19090 10/IB6 



$13 



O 

ERIC 



2GZ 



EXtfUCTS 



C0NTINUAI10 FETISHISM 



NOIL 'JPUN A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NtUKOSIS. EXTRACTS 

FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE PRECIPITATING CAUSE OF THE 

IllNtSS. I RAT-MAN ) • I9090I0/I95 



FETISHISM. 

FETISHISM. 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE FATHER COMPLEX ANO THE 
SOLUTION OF THE RAT IOEA. 

EXTRACTS FROM THE FLIESS PAPERS. 



FINOING 



1909010/ 200 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
transformations OF PUBERTY. The FINOING of an object. 



I 950A 1/17? 

FIRE 



FAIRY 

| HE OCCURRENCE IN 0REA1S OF MATERIAL FROM FAIRY TALES. 

oraft k. the neuroses of oefence. <a Christmas fairy 

TALE.). 

FAMILY 

FAMILY ROMANCES. 

FANtASIES 

LETTER 59. (AGE OF HYSTERICAL FANTASIES. I. 

ORAFT N. I IMPULSES. FANTASIES ANO SYMPTOMS.). 

LETTER 101. {RETROSPECTIVE FANTASIES.). 



191 301 2/279 
I 950A 1/220 

I909C 9/235 

I950A 1/2*4 
I9S0A 1/254 
19: OA 1/276 



THE ACQUISITION ANO CONTROL OF FIRE. 

FIVE-VEAR-OLO 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A : I VE- VEAR-OLO BOV. 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A FIVE-VEAR-OLO BOV. CASE 
HISTORY ANO ANALYSIS OF LITTLE-HANS. 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A FIVE-VEAR-OLO 00V. 
(L1ULE-HANS). 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IVE- VEAR-OLU BOV. 

lutle-hans case sheos light on phobias. 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A FIVE-VEAR-OLO BOV. 

little-hans Case ano chilohooo education, postscript. 



LETTER 102. (HYSTERIA ANO FANTASIES.). 



1950A 1/277 FIXATION 



FARROW 

PREFATORY NOTE TO A PAPER BY t. PICKWORTH FARROW. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL AIM. 
192 6C20/280 ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 
AIMS. 



FATHER 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 

from the case history, the father complex ano the 

SOLUTION OF THE RAT IOEA. 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. FIXATION TO TRAUMAS- THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

1909010/200 FLIESS 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHILDHOOD. 
RELATION OF TOTEM MEALS TO FATHER ANO GOO. 



1912X13/140 



EXTRACTS FROM THE FLIESS PAPERS. 
LETTER 60. (OREAM ABOUT FLIESS.). 



FATHER-LOSS 



FOLKLORE 



LEONARDO-OA-VINCI ANO A MEMORY Or HIS CHlLOKJOO. 
EFFECTS OF FATHER-LOSS ON LEONAROO. 



1 910C1 1/ 1 19 



OREAMS IN FOLKLORE IFREUO ANO OPPFNHElM). 



FATHER-SUBST ITUTE 



FONO 



A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY oemonological neurosis, the oevil 
AS FATHER-SUBSTITUTE. I923DI9/ 83 



The INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MAIERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL OREAMS. OREAMS OF THE OEATH OF 
PERSONS OF WHOM THE OREAMER IS FONO. 



FAULTY 

THE SUBTLETIES OF A FAULTY ACTION. 
FAUS SE-RECONN A I SSA NCE 



19 35B22/23 3 



FORE-PLEASURE • 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
IRANSFORMAT I ONS OF PJOERfV. THE PRIMACY OF THE GENITAL 
ZONE S ANO THE FORE-PLEASURE. 



F AUSSE-RECONNA I SSA NCE I OE JA-RACONT E I IN PSYCHOANALYTIC cnocfrki 

TREATMENT • i9 1AAI 3/20 1 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERVOAY LIFE. THE FORGETTING UF 
:AR FOREIGN WOROS. 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. The great 
(RAT-MAN). 



NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
OBSESSIVE FEAR. 

1909010/165 



FOREL* S 

REVIEW OF AUGUST FORE L* S HYPNOTISM. 



FEASTS 



FORGETFULNESS 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHILOHOOO. 
ANIMAL PHOBIAS. SACRIFICIAL FEASTS. 



1912X13/126 



THE PSVCI'lCAL MECHANISM OF FORGETFULNESS. 



FEELINGS 



FORGETTING 



INHIBITIONS! SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY REPRODUCES 

FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 1926020/132 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OtSCONTENTS. MAN'S NEEO FOR 

RELIGION ARISES FROM FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 1930A21/ 64 



FEMALE 



FEMALE SEXUALITY. FEMALE OEOIPUS COMPLEX DIFFERS FROM 
MALE. 



193 1B21/22 3 



FEMALE SEXUAL! IV. GIRL'S PRE-OEOIPAL MOTIVES FOR 

TURNING AWAY FROM MOTHER. 193IB2I/227 



FEMALE SEXUALITY. GIRL'S PRE-OEOIPAL SEXUAL AIMS TOWARO 

MOTHER. 1931B2I/235 



FEMALE SEXUALITY. CRITIQUE OF ANALYTIC LI TERAlURE ON 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. 1931B21/240 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
ORE AM-PROC ESSES. THE FORGETTING OF OREAMS • 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAV LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
PROPER NAMES. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERVOAY LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
FOREIGN WOROS. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERVOAY LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
NAMES ANO SETS OF WOROS. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERVOAY LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
IMPRESSIONS ANO INTENTIONS. THE FORGETTING OF 
IMPRESSIONS ANO KNOWLEOGE . 

The PSYCHOPATHOLOGY of EVERVOAY life, the forgetting of 
impressions ano intentions, the forgetting of 
intentions. 



FEMININI rv 



FORGOTTEN 



NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 
FEMININI TV. 



1933A22/II2 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. IhE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. WHY (TEAMS ARE 
FORGOTTEN AFTER WAKING. 



FERENCZ! 



FORMATION 



PREFACE TO SANDOR FERENCZI S PSYCHOANALYSIS: ESSAYS IN 
I HE FiLLU OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. I910B 9/252 



FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. SECONO LECTURE. 
REPRESSION ANO SYMPTOM FORMATION. 



DR. SANOOR FERENCZ! (ON HlS 50TH BIRThOAY). 
SANOOR FERENCZI • 



1923119/267 
1 93 3C22/22 7 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE PATHS TO THE FORMATION OF 
SYMPTOMS. 



SI4 



I927E2I/I49 

1927E21/I52 

I905D 7/222 

I932A22/I85 

1909BI0/ 3 

I 909RI 0/ 22 
I909BI0/I9I 
1909BI0/II5 
I 909BI 0/ I 4 I 

19050 7/149 
1916X16/273 

I 950A 1/173 
I 950A 1/245 

I957AI2/175 
1900A 4/248 

19050 7/207 

1901 B 6/ 8 

18B9A 1/ 89 
1898B 3/287 

1900A 5/509 
1991B 6/ I 
1 901 B 6/ 8 

1901 B 6/ 15 

1 901 B 6/134 

I 901 B 6/151 

I 900A 4/ 43 

1910A1I/ 21 
1916X16/358 



203 



FORMAT ION 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANU ANXIETY. RELATION BETWEEN 

symptom Format ion ano anmetv. 

FORMATIONS 

jokes ano their relation to the unconscious, analytic 
part, the technique of jokes, condensations ano 

SUBSTITUTIVE FORMATIONS IN DREAMS. 

FORMULA T IONS 

FORMULATIONS ON THE TWO PRINCIPLES OF MENTAL 
FUNCTIONING. 

FOUR-VEAR-OLO 

ASSOCIATIONS OF A f >JR-V EAR-DLl) CMlLO. 

FRAGMENT 

FRAGMENT OF An ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. 

FRAGMFNT of an analysis of a case of HYSTERIA. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 

CLINICAL PICTURE. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 
FIRST OREAM. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 
SECONO OREAM. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. 

POSTSCRIPT . 

FRAU-PJ 

ORAFT J. FRAU-PJ. UGEO 271 . 

FREE 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTFRMINABLE . CONSTITUTIONAL 
VARIABLES IN EGO. LIBIDO AND FREE AGGRESSIVENESS. 

FREUO 

The neuropsychoses of defence, appendix: the emergence 
OF FRFUO S FUNDAMENTAL HYPOTHESES. 

OBSESSIONS ANO PHDBIAS: THEIR PSYCHICAL MECHANISM ANO 
THFIR AETIOLOGY. APPENDIX: FREUD S VIEWS ON PHOBIAS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE i HE DRV OF SEXUALITY. APPENOIX: LIST 
OF WRITINGS BY FREUO DEALING PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY 
Wl TH SEXUAL I TV. 

PAPERS ON METAPSVCHOLOGV. THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENOIX A: 
FREUO ANO EWALO HER 1 NG. APPENDIX B: PSYCHO-PHYSICAL 
PARALLELISM. APPENOIX C: WORDS ANO THINGS. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. APPENDIX A: THE CHRONOLOGY OF THt 
CASE OF FRAU EMMV-VON-N. APPENDIX B: LIST OF WRITINGS 
BY FREUO OEALING PRINCIPALLY W* TH CONVERSION HYSTERIA. 

ABSTRACTS OF TH3 SCI E NT I F 1C WRIT! NGS OF OR. SIGM. FREUO 
1877-1697. 

FREUO S PSVLHANALVTIC PRDCEOURE . 

PREFACE TO FREUO S SHDRT ER WR IT INGS 1093-1906. 

THE MOSES OF MICHELANGELO. FREUD 5 DESCRIPTION. 

ON THE HISTORY OF THE psychoanalytic movement, early 
HISTORY. FREUO WORKING ALONE. 

OOSTOEVSKV ANO PARRICIDE. A LETTFR FROM FREUO TO 
TMEOOOR RE I K. 

LETTET. FROM FREUO. 

THF INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. APPENOIX A « A PREMONITORY 
OREAM FULFILLED. APPENOIX 8* LIST OF WRITINGS BY FREUO 
OEALING PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY WITH OREAMS. 

LETTER 70. IFREUO S EARLY MEMORIES FROM 
SELF-ANALYSI s. I . 

PRIMARY PROCESSES - SLEEP AND OREAMS: THE ANALYSIS OF 
OREAMS*. OREAM CONSCIOUSNESS I FREUO S USE OF THE CONCEPT 
OF REGRESSION. 

REPORT ON FREUO S STUOlES IN PARIS ANO BERLIN. 

OREAMS IN FOLKLORE IF REUO AND OPPENHE I Ml . 

FUCHS 

LETTER TO GEORG FUCHS. 

FULFILLEO 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. APPENOIX A: A PREMONITORY 
OREAM FULFILLEO. APPENOIX R: LIST OF WRITINGS BY FREUO 
OEALING PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY WITH OREAMS. 

FULF ILLMENT 

THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. A OREAM IS THE 
FULFILLMENT OF A WISH. 



CONI I NUAI 1 0 FULFILLMENT 
192602 G/199 



THl INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OR E AM PKUCESSFS. WISH FULFILLMENT. 



WISH 



1905C 8/ 29 



1911812/213 



1920018/266 



1905E 7/ 
I905E 7/ 



1905E 7/ 15 
1905E 7/ 69 
1905E 7/ 99 
1905E 7/112 

I950A 1/215 

1937C2 3/290 

3 / 62 

3/ 83 

7/299 

1891819/20 5 

10950 2/307 

18978 3/225 
I9D9A 7/299 
19068 3/ 3 

1919813/222 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. 

FULF ILLMENT. 

LETTER 105. (IMPORTANCE OF W|SH FULF I LLMF N I . I . 

FUNCTION 

THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. ThE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
IN OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF DRFAMS. THEORIES OF 
ORlAMlNG ANO ITS FUNCTION. 

THF INTERPRETATION of ORtAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ThE 
DREAM PROCESSES. AROUSAL BY DREAMS - THE FUNCTION OF 
DREAMS - ANXIETY OREAMS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MIND ANO IIS 
WORKINGS. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL FUNCTION. 

FUNCT TONING 

FORMULATIONS ON THE TWO PRINCIPLES OF MENTAL 
FUNCT ION I NG. 

THE FUNCTIONING OF THE APPARATUS*. THE PATHS OF 
CQNOUC T 1 0N. THc EXPERIENCE OF SATISFACTION: THE 

experience of pain: affects and wishful states. 

FUNCTIONS 

JOKES ANO their rflation td the unconscious, synthetic 

PART. THE MECHANISM OF PlEASUKE ANO THE PSVCHOGENE SI S 
OF JOKES. The PURPOSE AND FUNCTIONS OF JOKES. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY. INHIBITIONS REFLECT 
RESTRICTIONS OF EGO FUNCTIONS. 

FUNDAMENTAL 

THE NEUROPSYCHOSES OF 01FENCE. APPENOIX: THE EMERGENCE 
OF FREUO S FUNDAMENTAL HYPOTHESES. 

FUNERAl 

LETTER 50. (FUNERAL DREAM. I . 

GENE SI S 

PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF HYSTERIA: HYSTERICAL COMPULSION: THE 
GENESIS OF HYSTERICAL COMPULSION. 

GENITAL 

THREE ESSAYS UN THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PJBERTV • THE PRIMACY OF ThE GENITAL 
ZONES ANO THE FORE-PLEASURE. 

THE iNFANTILt GENITAL ORGANIZATION 

into The Theory of sexuality. 

GIRL *S 



1926821/195 

1933822/203 

199 1C 5/623 
I9S0A 1/261 

I950A 1/335 
I956A 1/ 3 

1957A12/175 

1931F22/25 I 
199 l C 5/623 



AN INTERPOLATION 



FEMALE SEXUALITY. GIRL'S PRE-OEDIPAL MOTIVES FOR 
TURNING AWAY FROM MOTHER. 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. GIRL'S PRE-OEOlPAL SEXUAL AIMS TOWARD 
MOTHER. 



GOO 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMlSM IN CHILOHOOO, 
RELATION OF TOTEM HEALS TO FATHER ANO GOO. 



1919019/ 7 GOOS 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS 
EGYPTIAN. TWO GOOS AND TWO MOSES. 

GOETHE 

THE GOETHE PRIZE. 

GRAOE 



IF MOSES WAS AN 



1900A 9/122 



GROUP PSYCHOLOGY AND THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. A 
DIFFERENTIATING GRAOE IN THE EGO. 

GRAOlVA 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. SYNOPSIS OF 
JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. 

OE LUC’I ONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. GRAOlVA ANO 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAHS IN JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. RELATIONS 
8ETWFEN OREAMS AND DELUSIONS • 

OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. TREATMENT OF 
|HE OELUSIONS IN GRADlvA. POSTSCRIPT TO THE SECONO 
EOI TION. 

GROUNOS 

ON THE GROUNOS FOR DETACHING A PARTICULAR SVNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER iHE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE T69H ANGST ANO ITS ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 



CONIINUAT 10 

1900A 5/550 

1910X15/21 3 
I950A l /27b 

1 900 A 9/ / 5 

1900A 5/5/3 
1990A23/152 

1911612/213 
1950A 1/31? 

1905C 8/128 
1926D20 / 87 

3/ 62 
1950A 1/233 

I950A 1/39 7 

19050 7/207 

192 36 19/19 1 

193 IBc 1/22 7 
193102 1/235 

1912X13/190 

1939A23/ 30 
193DE2 1/207 

1 92 1C 10/12 9 

1907A 9/ 3 

1907A 9/ 7 

1 90 7 A 9/ 91 
1907A 9/ 69 

1907A 9/ 07 
3/116 



S’15 



o 

ERIC 



204 



GROUNOS 

ON THE GRDUNOS FOR OETAChING A PARTICULAR SVNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE CLINICAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF ANXlFTV NEUROSIS. 

ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SVNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER T»»E OESCRlPTIUN ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
INCIOENCE ANO AETIOLOGY OF ANXIETY NFUROSIS. 

ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETAChING A PARTICULAR SVNO.'IOME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA IJNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
FIRST STEPS TOWAROS A THEORY OF ANXlFTV NFUROSIS. 

ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SVNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
RELATION TO OTHER NEUROSES. 

GROUP 



CONTINUATIO HERlNG 



I095B 3/ 90 



1095B 3/ 99 



1 B95B 3/106 



lB9*ti 3/11? 



GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THF 


ANAL YSI S 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 






I921C1B/ 67 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 






192IM0/ 69 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE 
DESCRIPTION OF THE GROUP 


ANALYSIS 

HINO. 


OF 


The 


EGO. 


LE-60N' S 


192ICIB/ 72 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO Tilt ANALYSIS 
ACCOUNTS DF COLLECTIVE MENTAL LIFE 


OF 

; • 


THE 


EGO. 


OTHER 


I921C1B/ 02 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE 
SUGGESTION AND LlBtOO. 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


The 


EGO. 






1 92 1C 1 0/ B0 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 
ARTIFICIAL GROUPS: THE CHURCH ANO 


OF 

THE 


the egu. 

ARMY. 


TWO 




1 92 1C 1 8/ 93 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 
PROBLEMS ANO LINES OF WORK. 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


FURTHER 


I921C1B/100 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE 
IDENTIFICATION. 


ANALVS IS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 






1 92 1 Cl B/ 105 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE 
LOVE ANO HVPNOStS. 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


the 


EGO. 


BEING IN 


1921C1B/1U 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE 
INSTINCT. 


ANAL Y SI S 


OF 


The 


EGO. 


THE 


HERO 


192 1C 10/117 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE 
ANO THE PRIMAL HORDE. 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


the 


EGO. 


THE 


GROUP 


1921C10/122 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE 
DIFFERENTIATING GRADE IN 


ANALYSIS 

the ego. 


OF 


the 


EGO. 


A 




19210 6/129 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE 
POSTSCRIPT. 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


the 


EGO. 






I921C1B/1 34 


GROUPS 
















GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO IME 


ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


TWO 







ARTIFICIAL GROUPS: THE CHURCH ANO THE ARMY. 

GUILT 

SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET MIT H IN PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 
CRIMINALS FROM A SENSE OF G U* LT . 

HA U MANN 

A seventeenth-century oehonological neurosis, the story 

OF CHRISTOPH HAUMANN THE PAINTFR. 

HALS MANN 

THE EXPERT OPINION IN THE HALSMANN CASE. 

HANOLING 

PAPFRS ON TECHNIQUE. THE HANOLING OF 
dream-interpretation IN PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

HEAD 

MEOUSA’S HEAD. 

HEBREW 

ON THE OCCASION OF THE OPENING OF THE HEBREW 
UNIVERSITY. 

HELPLESSNESS 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXlFTV. ANXIETY REPRODUCES 
FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 

c i vIl ieat ion a.io its oiscontents. man's neeo for 

RELIGION ARISES FROM FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 
HEMl-ANAESTHESIA 

OBSERVATION OF A SEVERE CASE OF HEM l-ANAE STHF SI A IN A 
HYSTERICAL MALE. 

HERO 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THF EGO. THE HERO 
INSTINCT. 

HEREOITY 



1921CU/ 93 



1916014/332 



1923019/ 73 



1931021/251 



1 9 1 1 E 1 ?/ 09 



1 940C 1 0/27 3 



925C 19/292 



1926020/132 
193CA/1/ 64 



10060 1/ 23 



1921C1B/1I7 



1096A 3/141 



PAPFRS ON MET A° SVC HULOGV ■ THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENOlX A: 
FREUO ANO EWALO HERlNG. APPENOlX B: PSVC HO-PHYS 1C AL 
PARALLELISM. APPENOlX C: WOROS ANO THINGS. 

HISTORICAL 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN 
HISTORICAL AND MATERIAL TRUTH. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. HOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL PREMISS. 

MDSE? ANO MONUTHFISM: THREE ESSAYS. HOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHFIST RELIGION. HISTORICAL TRUTH. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM* THREE ESSAYS. HOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT. 

Hi STORIES 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASS HISTORIES: FRAULEIN ANNA-0. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: FRAU EMHV-VON-N. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: MISS LUCV-R. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: KATHARlNA. 

STUDIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: FRAULEIN 
EL ISA BETH- VON- R • 

ORAFT F. COLLECTION III. UWO CASE HISTORIES. I. 

LETTER 21. UWO CASE HISTORIES.). 

HISTORY 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IV E-VE AR-OLO BOV. CASE 
HISTORY ANO ANALYSIS OF LITTLE-HANS. 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF QBSESSIO\Al NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 

from the case history: the beginning of the treatment. 

INFANT tLE SEXUALITY. (RAT-MAN). 

NUTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE GREAT OBSESSIVE FEAR. 

(RAT-MAN) . 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE It t STORY. INITIATION INTO THE NATURE OF 
THE TREATMENT. IRAT-MAN). 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF UBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. SOME OBSESSIONAL IOEAS ANO ThEIR 
EXPLANATION. (RAT-MAN). 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE PRECIPITATING CAUSE OF THE 
ILLNESS. (RAT-MAN). 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXIhACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE FATHER COMPLEX ANO THE 
SOLUTION OF THE RAT IOEA. 

on the history of the psychoanalytic movement. 

UN THl HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. EARLY 
HISTORY. FREUO WORKING ALONE. 

ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. THE 
EARLY PSYCHOANALYTIC MU VE ME NT . 

ON THF history of The PSYCHOANALYTIC movement. 

DEPARTURES OF JUNG ANO AOLER. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. INTRODUCTORY 
REMARKS ABOUT THE WOLFMAN. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. GENERAL 
SURVEY OF THE PATIENT'S ENVIRONMENT ANO OF THE HISTORY 
OF THE CASE. tWOLFHAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANT ILF NEUROSIS. THE 
SEDUCTION ANO ITS IMMEOIATE CONSEQUENCES. (WOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE DREAM 
ANO THE PRIMAL SCENE. (WOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. A FEW 
OISCUSSIDNS. (WOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANT ILF NEUROSIS. THE 
OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. (WOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. ANAL EROTISM 
ANO THE CASTRATION COMPLEX. (WOLFMAN I . 

from The HISTORY op an infantile neurosis, fresh 

MATERIAL FROM THE PRIMAL PERIOO - SOLUTION. (WOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
RECAPITULATIONS ANO PROBLEMS. I WOLFMANI . 

AN AUTDBtOGKAPHlCAL STUOV. HISTORY OF APPLIED ANALYSIS. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. ONE HUNOREO YEARS OF Ht STORY SUPPKFSSEO. 



SIB 



O 

ERIC 



BOS 



1891 Bl 4/205 

1937023/265 
1939A23/ 59 
1939A 23/1 2 t 
1939A23/132 

10950 2/ 21 
1B95D 2/ 40 
1B950 2/106 
10950 2/125 

10950 2/135 
1950A 1/195 
1950A 1/199 

1909010/ 22 

1 909010/158 

1909010/165 

1909010/173 

1909010/106 

1909010/195 

1 90901 G/?OU 
1914014/ 3 

1914014/ 7 

1914014/ 25 

1914014/ 42 
191BR17/ 3 

1910017/ 7 

1918B17/ 13 

I918BI7/ 19 

191BR17/ 29 

1 9 1 0B 1 7/ 40 

1 91 0B I 7/ 61 

1918B17/ 72 

1 91 0B1 7/ 09 

191BHI 7/104 
1925020/ *2 



HEREOITY ANO THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES 



1939A23/ 41 



« 



HOMUSfJUMLI IY 

IHE P SYCHUGENfc SI S OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
HOMAN. 

The PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
HOMAN . 

THE PSYCHOGENESI S OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
HOMAN. 

THE PSYCHOGENE S I S OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
WOMAN. 

SOME NEUROTIC MECHANISMS IN JEALOUSY. PARANOIA AMO 
HOMOSEXUAL MY. 



I920AIB/I96 
I920AI8/I55 
I920AI 8/ 160 
I920AI 8/167 
19228 1 8/22 I 



HYSTERIA 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. INNATE DISPOSITION - DEVELOPMENT 
OF HYSTERIA. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. THE PSYCHOTHERAPY OF HYSTERIA. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. APPENDIX Ai THE CHRUNOLOCY OF THE 
CASE OF FRAU tMHY-VON-N. APP6N0IX B* LIST OF WRITINGS 
BY FREUO OEALING PRINCIPALLY WITH CONVERSION HYSTERIA. 

FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEUROPSYCHOSES OF DEFENCE . THE 
SPECIFIC ^ETIOLOGY OF HYSTERIA. 

the aetiolugy of hysteria. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYGTERIA. 



HORDE 

GRUUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. THE GROUP 
ANO (HE PRIMAL HORDE. 

HORROR 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE HORROR OF INCFST. 



1 92 1 C I 8/122 
1912X13/ I 



hostile 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. A ANALYTIC 
PART. THE PURPOSE of JOKES. HOSTILE* CYNICAL ANO 
SKEPTICAL JOKES. 



HUMAN 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURLS ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS. 



1916X16/303 



HUMOUR 



JOKES AND their relation to THE UNCONSCIOUS 
PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC . 
ARE NOT PROPER IN JOKES! RELATION UF HUMOUR 



. THEORETIC 
COMIC THINGS 
TC JOKES. 



I9Q5C 8/22 1 



HUMOUR. 



192702 1 / *60 



Wl»NO 10 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. HYPN01D STATES. 



10950 2/215 



FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 
CLINICAL PICTURE. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 
FIRST OREAN. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. THE 
SECONO DREAM. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF HYSTERIA. 
POSTSCRIPT. 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. HYPNOSIS. HYSTERIA* ACTUAL 
NFUROSES. 

LETTER 56. (HYSTERIA ANO WITCHES.). 

LETTER 61. (STRUCTURE OF HYSTERIA.). 

ORAFT L. (ARCHITECTURE OF HYSTERIA.). 

ORAFT M. (REPRESSION IN HYSTERIA.). 

LETTER 102. (HYSTERIA ANO FANTASIES.). 

PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF HYSTERIA I HYSTERICAL COMPULSIONS THE 
GENESIS OF HYSTERICAL COMPULSION. 

HYST ERICAL 



HYPNUSIS 

HYPNOSIS. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. BLING IN 
LOVE ANO HYPNOSIS. 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. HYPNOSIS. HYSTERIA* ACTUAL 
NEUROSES. 

HYPNOT ISM 

PAPERS ON HYPNOTISM ANO SUGGESTION. 

REVIEW OF AUGUST F OREL* S HYPNOTISM. 

A CASE OF SUCCESSFUL TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM. 
HYPOCHONORIA 

ON NARCISSISM. NARCISSISM IN ORGANIC OISEASE* 
HYPOCHONORIA. ANO EROTIC LIFE. 

HYPOTHESES 

THE NEUROPSYCHOSES OF OEFENCE. APPENOIX* THE EMERGENCE 
OF FREUO S FUNDAMENTAL HYPOTHESES. 

HYSTERIA 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. E0IT0R«S INTRODUCTION ANO PREFACES 
TO THE FIRST ANO SECONO EOlTIONS. 

iwo short reviews, averbeck's acute neurasthenia ano 

WEIR MITCHCLL'S NEURASTHENIA ANO HYSTERIA. 

HYSTERIA. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. ON THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF 
HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA* PRELIMINARY COMMUN ICAT I ON . 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES* FRAULEIN ANNA-0. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES* FRAU EMMY-VON-N . 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES* MISS LUCV-R. 

STUU1ES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: KATHARINA. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES* FRAULEIN 
EL ISABETH-VON-R. 

STUDIES ON HYSTERIA. ARE ALL HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA 
IOEOGEN IC7 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. INTERACERE bRAL TONIC EXCITATIONS - 
AFFECTS. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. HYSTERICAL CONVERSION. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. MYPNOIO STATES. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. IWCONSCIOUS IOEAS ANO IOEAS 
INADMISSIBLE TO CONSCIOUSNESS - SPLITTING OF THE MlNO. 



18910 I/I03 

I92ICI8/I II 

» 

1925020/ 19 

1 / 61 
I889A 1/ 89 
I892B I /I I 5 

I9I9CI9/ 82 

V 62 

?/ IX 



OBSERVATION OF A SEVERE CASE OF HE Ml -ANAEST HES I A IN A 
HYSTERICAL MALE. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. ON THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF 
HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA* PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION. 

SOME POINTS FOR A COMPARATIVE STUD/ OF ORGANIC ANO 
HYSTERICAL MOTOR PARALYSES. 

on the psychical mechanism of hysterical phenomena. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. ARE ALL HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA 
IOEOGENJC? 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. HYSTERICAL CONVERSION. 

HYSTERICAL PHANT ASICS ANO THEIR RELATION TO 

bisexuality. 

SOME GENERAL REMARKS ON HYSTERICAL ATTACKS. 

SKETCHES FOR The PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION OF 1893. ON 

the theory of hysterical attacks. 

LETTER 59. (AGE OF HYSTERICAL FANTASIES.). 

PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF HYSTERIA* HYSTERICAL COMPULSION) THE 
GENESIS OF HYSTERICAL COMPULSION. 

PATHOLOGICAL OEFENCE THE HYSTERICAL PROTON PSEUOOS 
DETERMINANTS OF THE (PROTON PSEUOOS) DISTURBANCE OF 
THOUGHT BY AFFECT. 



I887B 1/ 35 10 

I888B 1/ 39 THE EGO ANO THE 10 . 

THE ego AMO IHE 10 . CONSCIOUSNESS ano what is 
1893A 2/ I UNCONSCIOUS. 



18950 2/ 21 THE EGO ANO THE 10 . 



18950 2/9 B 
IB950 2/106 
18950 2/125 

18950 2/135 

18950 2/1 B6 

10950 2/192 
18950 2/20 3 
18950 2/215 



the ego ano the 10 . THE ego ano the superego 
(EGO-IOEAL). 

The EGO ANO ThC 10 . TH. two classes of instincts. 

THE EGO ANO THE 10 . THE OEPENOENT RELATIONSHIPS OF THF 
EGO. 

THE EGO ANO THE 10 . THE OESCRIPTIVE ANO THE OYNAMIC 
UNCONSCIOUS. THE GREAT RESERVOIR OF LIBIOO. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. RELATION OF EGO TO 
THE 10 ANO TO SYMPTOMS. 

IOEA 

THF RESISTANCES TO PSYCHOANALYSIS. APPENDIX* EXTRACT 
FROM SCHOPENHAUER* S THE WORI 0 AS WILL ANO IOEA. 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS , 
18950 2/222 FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE FATHER COMPLEX ANO THE 

S-17 




CONTI NUA T 1 0 

18950 2/290 
18950 2/253 

IBS 50 2/307 

I896B 3/162 
I896C 3/189 
I905E 7/ 3 

I905F 7/ 7 

I905E 7/ 15 

I905E 7/ 69 

I9Q5E 7/ 99 

»905E 7/1 1 2 

1925020/ 19 
I950A 1/292 
1950A 1/297 
I950A I/29B 
I950A 1/250 
I950A 1/277 

I950A 1/397 

18860 1/ 23 

189 3* 2/ I 

I893C i/157 
I893H 3/ 25 

18950 2/186 
18950 2/203 

1908 A 9/157 
I909A 9/227 

1 99 I A I / 1 9 7 
I950A 1/299 

I950A 1/397 
I950A 1/35 I 

1923819/ 3 

1923BI9/ 12 
1923BI9/ 19 

I923BI9/ 2 B 
1923819/ 

I923BI9/ 9 B 

1923819/ 60 

1926020/ 97 

r‘ 

19/223 



10EA 



CONTlNUATlO INFANTILE 



SOLUTION OF THE RAT IOEA. 1909010/200 

IOENTIF (CATION 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. 

IDENTIFICATION. 1921C10/1O5 

I OE OGb NIC 

' T UO I E S ON HYSTERIA. ARE ALL HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA 

IOEOGENIC? 10950 2/106 

ILLNESS 

CIVILIZED SEXUAL MORALITY ANO MOOERN NERVOUS ILLNESS. 19000 9/177 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF O0SESS IONAL NEUROSIS, EXTRACTS 

FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE PRECIPITATING CAUSE OF THE 

ILLNESS. (MAT-MAN). 1909010/195 

ILLUSION 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. CIVILIZATION RESTS UPON 

RENUNCIATION OT INSTINCTUAL WISHES. 1927C21/ 3 

The future of an illusion, consequences of instinctual 

RENUNC I AT ION. |N WHAT OOES THE PECULIAR VALUE OF 

RFLlGIOUS IOEAS LIE. 1927C21/ 10 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. ORIGINS OF RELIGIONS. 1927C21/ 21 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. THE PSYCHOLOGICAL 

SIGNIFICANCE OF RELIGIOUS IOEAS. RELIGIOUS IOEAS ARE 

ILLUSIONS. I927C21/ 25 

the future of an illusion, relations oetween 

CIVILIZATION ANO RELIGION. 1927C2I/ 3* 

the future of an illusion, religion is a substitute for 

RATIONALITY. 1927C21/ 4,0 

the future of an illusion, is rationality possible. 

RELATION OF RELIGION TO SCIENCE. 192 7C2 1/ 4,6 

ILLUSIONS 

THE FUTURE OF AN IfLUSIOM. THE P SVCHOLOG »CAL 

SIGNIFICANCE OF RELIGIOJS IOEAS. RELIGIOUS IOEAS ARE 

ILLUSIONS. I927C21/ 25 

ILLUSTRATION 

an OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE NINO ANO ITS 

WORKINGS. OREAM INTERPRETATION AS AN ILLUSTRATION. 1950A23/165 

IMAGINATION 

THE UNCANNY. RELATION OF IMAGINATION TO REALITY. 1919H1 7/24,5 

IMMATURE 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL 
OBJECT. INVERSION. SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 

ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS. 19050 7/136 

IMMEOIATE 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE 

SEOUCTION ANO ITS IMMEOIATE CONSEQUENCES. (WOLFMAN). 1910017/ 19 

impartial 

THF QUESTION OF LAV ANALYSIS. CONVERSATIONS WITH AN 

IMPARTIAL PFR SON . 1926E20/179 

IMPRESSIONS 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERVOAV LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
IMPRESSIONS ANO INTENTIONS. THE FORGETTING OF 

IMPRESSIONS ANO KNOWLEOGE. 19010 6/134 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERVOAV LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
IMPRESSIONS ANO INTENTIONS. THE FORGETTING OF 

INTENTIONS. l90l8 6/l5l 

IMPULSES 

oraft n. (Impulses, fantasies ano symptoms.). 1950A 1/254, 

INAOMl SSI0LE 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. UNCONSCIOUS IOEAS ANO IOUS 

INADMISSIBLE TO CONSCIOUSNESS - SPLITTING OF THE MlNO. 10950 2/222 
INCEST 

TOTEM AND TABOO. THE HORROR OF INCEST. 1912x13/ 1 

INC IOENCE 

ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

1NCI0ENCE ANO AETIOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 1*9*0 3/ 99 

IN0IFFEREN7 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 

OF OREAMS. RECENT ANO I NO IFFERENT MATERIAL IN OREAMS. 1900A 4/163 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. INFANTILE MATERIAL AS A SOURCE OF OREAMS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. REASONS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 
PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE P SVCHONEUROSES. INTIMATION OF 
THE INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SEXUALITY. 

three essays on the theorv of sexuality, infantile 

SEXUALITY: THE PER 100 OF SEXUAL LATENCY IN CHILOHOOO 
ANO ITS INTERRUPTIONS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE MANIFESTATIONS OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL AIM OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

three essays on the theory of sexuality, infantile 

SEXUALITY. MASTURRATORY SEXUAL MANIFESTATIONS. 

three essays on the theory of sexuality, infantile 

SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL RESEARCHES OF CHILOHOOO. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE PHASES OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL 
ORGAN! ZAT ION . 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SOURCES OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF O0SE SSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY: THE BEGINNING OF THE TREATMENT. 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY. (RAT-MAN). 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS • FOURTH LECTURE. 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY ANO NEUROSIS. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. INTRODUCTORY 
REMARKS A0OUT THE WOLFMAN. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. GENERAL 
SURVEY OF THE PATIENT'S ENVIRONMENT ANO OF THE HISTORY 



1900A 4/109 

19050 7/170 

19050 7/173 
19050 7/179 
19050 7/103 
19050 7/105 
19050 7/194 

19050 7/197 
19050 7/200 

1909010/150 

19I0A11/ 40 
1910B1 7/ 3 

1910817/ 7 



OF THE CASE. (WOLFMAN). 


1918817/ 


13 


FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE 
SEOUCTION ANO ITS IMMEOIATE CONSEQUENCES. IWOLFMANI. 


1918817/ 


19 


FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE OREAM 
ANO THE PRIMAL SCENE. (WOLFMAN). 


191 BD 1 7/ 


29 


FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. A FEW 
OISCUSSIONS. (WfJLFMAN). 


191881 7/ 


48 


FRO* THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROUS. THE 
OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. (WOLFMAN). 


191881 7/ 


61 


FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. ANAL EROTISM 
ANO THE CASTRATION COMPLEX. (WOLFMAN). 


1918817/ 


72 


FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. FRESH 
MATERIAL FROM THE PRIMAL PERIOO - SOLUTION. (WOLFMAN). 


191881 7/ 


89 


FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
RECAPITULATIONS ANO PROBLEMS. (WOLFMAN). 


191881 7/104 


the infantile genital ORGANIZATION: an interpolation 

INTO THE THEORV OF SEXUALITY. 


192JE19/141 



INFANTILISM 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 
ARCHAIC FEATURES ANO INFANTILISM OF OREAMS. 

INHERITOR 

ON NARCISSISM. EGO-IOEAL, INHERITOR OF NARCISSISM. 
INHIBITIONS 

inhibitions* symptoms ano anxiety. 

inhibitions, symptoms ano anxiety, inhibitions reflect 
restrictions of ego functions. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. SYMPTOMS REFLECT 
I NTEfiSVS r I C CONFLICTS. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. RELATION OF EGO TO 
THT ID ANU TO SYMPTOMS. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY PROOUCE S 
REPRESSION. 

inhibitions* symptoms ano anxiety, oeffnses other than 

REPRESSION. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. UNOOING ANO 
ISOLATION. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY IS A SIGNAL 
OF DANGEROUS SEPARATION. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY REPRODUCES 
FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. RELATION BETWEEN 
SYMPTOM FORMATION ANO ANXIETY. 



1916X15/199 

1914CI4/ 92 

1926020/ 77 
1926020/ 87 
1926020/ 91 
1926020/ 97 
1926020/101 
19260 2 0/11 1 
1926020/119 
19^6020/124 
1926020/1 32 
1926020/144 



STB 



207 



tNH tot HONS 



CONI INUAT 10 



NTENT IONS 



INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY. 
CONSEQUENCE OF REPRESSION. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY. 
EARLIER VIEWS. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY. 
REMARKS ON ANXIETY. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY. 
MOURN INC. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY. 
OEFENCE. 



REPETt T ION t S THE 
MOO I F I CAT ION OF 
SUPPLE MEN! ARY 
ANXIETY. PAIN AND 
REPRESSION AND 



1926020/150 



THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
IMPRESSIONS AND INIENTIONS. THE FORGETTING OF 
IMPRESSIONS AND KNOWLEDGE. 



1901 B 6/13^ 



1926020/157 



1926020/164 



THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY UF EVERVOAV LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
IMPRESSIONS AND INTENTIONS. THE FORGETTING OF 

INTENTIONS. I901B 6/151 

I NT ER ACEREBRAL 



1926020/169 



STU01ES ON HYSTERIA. (NT ERACEAC BRAL TONIC EXCITATIONS - 

AFFECTS. 18950 2/19? 



1926020/173 INTERMINABLE 



IN I T I AT ION 



ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AND INTERMINABLE. 



1937C23/209 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF (I8SESS lONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 

FROM THE CASE HISTORY. INITIATION INTO THE NATURE OF 

THE TREATMENT. (RAT-MAN). 1909010/173 



ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AND INTERMINABLE. SETTING A TIME 
LIMIT FOR TERMINATION. FACTORS WHICH HAY MAKE ANALYSIS 
INTERMINABLE. 1937C23/21 6 



INNATE 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. INNATE DISPOSITION - Ofc VELCPM ENT 

OF HYST ER IA. 18950 2/240 



INNOCE NT 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 

PART*. THE PURPOSES OF JOKES. INNOCENT JOKES! SMUT ANO 

THE PURPOSE OF JOKES. 1905C 8/ 91 

INST INCT 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. THE SEXUAL INSTINCT IN NEUROTICS. 19050 7/163 



ON TRANSFORMATIONS OF INSTINCT AS EXEMPLlFtEO IN ANAL 

EROTI SM. I9I7CI7/125 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. SPECULATIONS ON THE 

OCATH INSTINCT. 1920G18/24 



GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. THE HERO 
INSTINCT. 1 92 1CI8/11 7 



ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. THE STRENGTH OF 
THE INSTINCTS VlS-A-VlS THE OTHER PSYCHICAL AGENCIES. 

ANALYSIS I ERM INABLE AND INTERMINABLE . PROTECTING 
AGAINST FUTURE CONFLICTS. 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. ALTERATIONS OF 
THE EGO AFFECT PROGNOSIS. 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AND INTERMINABLE. CONSTITUTIONAL 
VARIABLES IN EGO* L18IOO ANO FREE AGGRE SSI VENfcSS. 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. FACTORS IN THE 
ANALYST AFFECT PROGNOSIS. 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. BISEXUALITY IS 
THE STRONGEST RESISTANCE TO ANALYSIS. 

INTERNAL 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORCT ICAL YIELD. 
THE INTERNAL WORLD, 

INT ERPOLAT ION 



1937C23/224 
I937C 2 3/230 
1937C2 3/234 
I937C23/240 
I937C2 3/24 7 
1937C23/2 50 

1940A2 3/205 



AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. COLLABORATORS* DEFECTORS ANO 
NEW INSTINCT THEORY. 

C f V .* L 1 2 AT ION Alio ITS DISCONTENTS. ARGUMENTS FOR AN 
INSTINCT OF AGGRESSION ANO DESTRUCTION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES* HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCT. 

INSTINCTS 

THREE ESSAYS ON THF THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. COMPONENT INSIINCTS ANO EROTOGENIC ZONES. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. INSTINCTS ANO THEIR 
VICISSITUDES. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. INSTINCTS ANO THEIR 
VICISS ITUOFS. 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. REVISION OF THC THEORY 
OF INSTINCTS. 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. BIOLOGICAL ARGUMENTS FOR 
OEATH INSTINCTS. SUMMARY. 

THE EGO ANO THE 10 . THE TWO CLASSES OF INSTINCTS. 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. THE STRENGTH OF 
THE INSTINCTS ViS-A'ViS THE OTHER PSYCHICAL AGENCIES. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE THEORY OF THE INSTINCTS. 

INST IHCTUAL 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. INSTINCTUAL 
LIFE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS* ANO THE ORIGINS OF 
COMPULSION ANO OOU8T. 

THE FUTUR&^F AN ILLUSION. CIVILIZATION RESTS UPON 
RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCTUAL WISHES. 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. CONSEQUENCES OF INSTINCTUAL 
RENUNCIATION. IN WHAT OOES THE PECULIAR VALUE OF 
RELIGIOUS IDEAS LIE. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. ANXIETY 
ANO INSTINCTUAL LIFE. 

INST ITUTF 

PREFACE TO TEN YEARS OF THE BERLIN PSYCHOANALYTIC 
INSTITUTE. 

INTELLECTUAL 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE ORE AM-MORK . ABSURD 
DREAMS - INTELLECTUAL ACTIVITY IN OREAMS. 

INTELLECTUALITY 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM* THREE ESSAYS. MOSES* HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE AOVANCE IN 
I NTELLECTUALITY. 



1925020/ 48 



THE INFANTILE GENITAL ORGANIZATION: AN INTERPOLATION 

INTO THE THF DRY OF SEXUALITY. 1923E19/I4I 



1930A21/1 1 7 



INTERPRETATION 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. 



4/ XI 



1939A23/1 16 THF INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THfc SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE RELATION OF 
OREAMS TO WAKING LIFE. 1900A 4/ 1 



the interpretation of dreams, the scientific literature 

19050 7/167 OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL OF 

OREAMS - MEMORY IN DREAMS. 1900A 4/ 11 



191 5C 14/11 1 



191 5C 14/117 



1920G18/ 34 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LtTERATUPE 

OEALING WITH THF PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE STIMULI ANO 

SOURCES OF OREAMS. 1900/. 4/ 22 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THF SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 

DEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF ORFAHS. WHY OREAMS ARE 

FORGOTTEN AFTER WAKING. 190QA 4/ 43 



I920G1 9/ 44 
1923B19/ 40 



1937C23/224 



the interpretation of dreams, the scientific literature 

DEALING WITH THF PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THF DISTINGUISHING 
PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OREAMS. 1900A 4/ 4B 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
DEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE MORAL SENSE IN 
OREAMS. 1900A 4/ 63 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
194 0A23/148 IN OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THEORIES OF 

OREAMING ANO ITS FUNCTION. 1900A 4/ 75 



1909010/237 
1927C21 / 3 

1927C21 / 10 
1933A22/ 81 

1930B21/257 

1900 A 5/426 

I939A23/1 1 1 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE RELATIONS 

BETWEEN OREAMS ANO MENTAL OtSEASES. 190PA 4/ 8A 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE METHOO OF 

INTERPRETING OREAMS: AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAM. I900A 4/ 96 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. PREFACE TO THE FIRST* 

SECONO* THIRD* FOURTH* FIFTH* SIXTH* EIGHTH EOITIONS 

ANO THIRO IREVISEO) ENGLISH EOlTlON. 1900A 4/XX! 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE METHOO OF 
INTERPRETING OREAMS: AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAM 



(PREAMBLE ANO OREAM). 












I900A 


4/106 


THE 


INTERPRETATION OF 


OREAMS. 


A OREAM IS THE 








FULFILLMENT OF A WISH, 


• 










1900A 


4/122 


THE 


INTERPRETATION OF 


OREAMS. 


OtSTORTtON IN OREAMS. 


1900A 


4/134 


THE 


INTERPRETATION OF 


OREAMS. 


THE 


MATERIAL 


ANO 


SOURCES 






OF 


OREAMS. RECENT ANO 


IN01FFERENT 


MATERIAL 


IN l 


OREAMS. 


1900 A 


4/163 


THE 


INTERPRETATION OF 


OREAMS. 


THE 


MATERIAL 


ANO 


SOURCES 






OF 


DREAMS. INFANTILE MATERIAL 


AS 


A SOURCE 


OF OREAMS. 


1900A 


4/189 


THE 


INTERPRETATION OF 


OREAMS. 


THE 


MATERIAL 


ANO 


SOURCES 






OF 


OREAMS. THE SOMATIC SOURCES OF 


OREAMS. 






1900A 


4/221 


THE 


INTERPRETATION OF 


OREAMS. 


THE 


material 


ANO 


SOURCES 







S-19 



r 



208 



455-5B2 O * 72 • H 






INTERPRETATION 


CONTINUAT 10 


OF DREAMS. TYPICAL OREAMS: EM0ARASSING DREAMS OF BEING 
NAKED. 


190 0 A 4/242 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL OREAMS. OREAMS OF THE DEATH OF 
PERSONS OF WHOM THE DREAMER IS FONO. 


190 0 A 4/240 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL OREAMS. OTHER TYPICAL OREAMS. 


190GA 4/271 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF DREAMS. TYPICAL DREAMS. EXAMINATION OREAMS. 


190 OA 4/273 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WDRK: THE WORK 
OF CONDENSATION. 


190 0 A 4/279 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WDRK. THE WORK 
OF DISPLACEMENT. 


190 0 A 4/305 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE OREAM-WDRK. THE MEANS 
3F REPRESENTATION IN DREAMS. 


190 DA 4/310 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. 
CONSIDERATIONS OF REPRES ENT AB IL I TY . 


1900A 5/339 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. 
REPRESENTATION BY SYMBOLS IN OREAMS - SOME FURTHER 
TYPICAL OREAMS. 


190 OA 5/350 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. SCME 
EXAMPLES. CALCULATIONS ANO SPEECHES IN OREAMS. 


19D0A 5/405 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. ABSURD 
DREAMS - INTELLECTUAL ACTIVITY IN OREAMS. 


190 OA 5/426 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. AFFECTS 
IN OREAMS. 


1900 A 5/460 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. SECONDARY 
RE VI SION. 


190 0 A 5/400 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
DREAM-PROCESSES. THE FORGETTING OF OREAMS. 


190 OA 5/509 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
DREAM PROCESSES. REGRESSION. 


1900A 5/533 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DRFAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
DREAM PROCESSES. WISH FULFILLMENT. 


1900A 5/550 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
DREAM PROCESSES. AROUSAL BY OREAMS - THE FUNCTION OF 
OREAMS - ANXIETY OREAMS. 


19DDA 5/573 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
DREAM PROCESSES. THI: PRIMARY ANO SECONDARY PROCESSES “ 
REPRESSION. 


190 0 A 5/500 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
DREAM PROCESSES. THE UNCONSCIOUS ANO CONSCIOUSNESS - 
REALITY. 


190 OA 5/610 


LEONARD D-OA-VINCI ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILDHOOD. SEXUAL 
INTERPRETATION OF LEONARDO'S CHILDHOOD MEMORY. 


191DC1 1/ 93 


PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES CN A AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF A 
CASE OF PARANOIA (DEMENTIA PARANOtOES). ATTEMPTS AT 
INTERPRETAT ION. 


1911C12/ 35 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 
PREMISSES ANO TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION. 


1916X15/190 


REMARKS ON THE THEORY ANO PRACTICE OF DREAM 
INTERPRETATION. 


1923C19/1O0 


REMARKS ON THE THEORY ANO PRACTICE OF DREAM 
INTERPRETATION. 


192 3C 19/ 113 


REMARKS ON THE THEDRY ANO PRACTICE OF DREAM 
INTERPRETATION. 


1923C19/11 8 


SOME ADDITIONAL NOTE! ON OREAM INTERPRETATION AS A 
WHOLE. THE LIMITS TO THE POSSIBILITY OF 
INTERPRETATION. 


19251 19/ 1*5 


SOME AODITIONAL NOTES ON OREAM INTERPRETATION AS A 
WHOLE. MORAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE CONTENT OF OREAMS. 


19251 19/131 


SOME ADDITIONAL NOTES OH OREAM INT ERPRETAT ION AS A 
WHOLE. THE OCCULT SIGNIFICANCE OF OREAMS. 


1925119/135 


PREFACE TO MARIE BONAPARTE'S THE LIFE ANO WORKS OF 
EDGAR ALLEN POE: A PSYCHOANALYTIC INTERPRETATION. 


1933022/254 


AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. DREAM INTERPRETATION AS AN ILLUSTRATION. 


1 94 OA 2 3/ 165 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. APPENDIX A: A PREMONITORY 
OREAM FULFILLED. APPENDIX B: LIST OF WRITINGS BY FREUD 
DEALING PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY WITH OREAMS. 


194 1C 5/623 


INTERPRETING 




THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE METHOD Of 
INTERPRETING OREAMS: AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAM. 


190 0 A 4/ 96 


THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE ME THOO OF 
INTERPRETING OREAMS: AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAM 
(PREAMBLE ANO OREAM). 


190 0 A 4/ . 36 



INTERRUPTIONS 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY* THE PERIOD OF SEXUAL LATENCY IN CHILDHOOD 
AND ITS INTERRUPTIONS. 

INTERSVSTEHIC 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. SYMPTOMS REFLECT 
INTERSYSTEMIC CONFLICTS. 

INTIMATION 

THREE* ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. REASONS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 
PEAVECSE SEXUALITY IN THE PSYCHONEUROSES. INTIMATION OF 
THE INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SEXUALITY. 

INTOXICATION 

CIVIL I HAT ION AND ITS OISCONTENTS. MAN COPE!. WITH 
UNHAPPINESS THROUGH DIVERSION* SUBSTITUTION AND 
INTOXICATION. 

INVE I ON 

THP.EE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL 
OBJECT. INVERSION. SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 
ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS. 

ISOLATION 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. UNDOING AND 
I SOLATION. 

ISRAEL 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES* HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. 

JEALOUSY 

SOME NEUROTIC MECHANISMS IN JEALOUSY* PARANOIA ANO 
HOMOSEXUALITY. 

JENSEN'S 

DELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. 

DELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. SYNOPSIS OF 
JENSEN* S GRAOlVA. 

DELUSIONS AND OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. GRAOlVA ANO 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE JNCONSCtOUS. 

DELUSIONS ANO DREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. RELATIONS 
BETWEEN OREAMS ANO OELUStONS. 

OELUSIONS AND OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOlVA. TREATMENT OF 
THE OELUSIONS IN GRAOlVA. POSTSCRIPT TO THE SECDND 
EDITION. 

JEWl SH 

MDSES ANO MONOTHEISMS THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. COMPARISON OF JEWISH AflD ATEN RELIGIONS. 

JEWt SH-PRESS-CENTRE 

LETTER TO THE EDITOR OF THE JEW I SH-PRE SS-CENTRE IN 
ZURICH. 

JOKE 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. PUNS; ABSURDITY AS A 
JOKE TECHNIQUE. 

JOKES ANO THE IR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. RELATION OF JOKES TO THE 
COMIC; UNIFICATION AS A JOKE TECHNIQUE. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. ANALOGY AS A JOKE 
TECHNIQUE. 

JOKES 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. JOKES ARE SIMILAR TO 
OREAMS. 

JOKES AND THEIR RELATION TO T HF. UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. CONDENSATIONS ANO 
SUBSTITUTIVE FORMATIONS IN OREAMS. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. SUMMARY ANO PUNS. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. PUNSI ABSURDITY AS A 
JOKE TECHNIQUE. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. RELATION OF JOKES TO THE 
COMICJ UNIFICATION AS A JOKE TECHNIQUE. 



S-20 




209 



19050 7/173 
1926020/ 91 

19050 7/170 
1930A2 1/ 7* 

19050 7/136 
192602 0/119 
1939A23/1D5 

1922B 1 0/22 1 

19D7A 9/ 3 

19D7A 9/ 7 

1907A 9/ 41 
1907A 9/ 64 

19D7A 9/ 87 
1939A23/ 2* 
1925B19/291 

1905C 8/ 47 

1905C 8/ 60 

1905C 0/ 81 

1905C 0/ 3 

1905C 0/ 9 

1905C 8/ 16 

1905C 0/ 29 
1905C 0/ 45 

1905C 8/ 47 

1905C 0/ 60 






JOKES 

JOKES ANO IHEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PARI. THE TECWIQUE OF JOKES. REPRESENTATION BY 

oppositf: conceptual jokes. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. ANALOGY AS A JOKE 
TECHNIQUE. 

JOKES ANO IHEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE PURPOSES OF JOKES. INNOCENT JOKES! SMUT AND 
THE PURPOSE OF JOkES. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. A ANALYTIC 
PART. THE PURPOSE OP JOKES. HOSTILE. CYNICAL ANO 
SKEPTICAL JOKES. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MECHANISM OF PLEASURE ANO THE PSYCHOGENFSIS 
OF JOKES. 

JOKE S ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MECHANISM OF PLEASURE ANO THE PSYCHOGENESIS 
OF JOKES. THE PURPOSE ANO FUNCTIONS OF JOKES. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MOTIVES OP JOKES - JOKES AS A SOCIAL 
PROCESS. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO 7HE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. THE RELATION OF JOKEr TO OREAMS ANO TO THE 
UNCONSCIOUS. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TP THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES AND THE SPEGIES JF THE CO-1IC. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES AND THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. PSYCHICAL 
LOCATION DISTINGUISHES JOKES FROM THE COMIC. 

JOKES / NO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES AND THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. DIFFERENCES 
BETWEEN JOKES ANO COMIC. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. COMIC THINGS 
'.RE NOT PROPER IN JOKES: RELATION OF HUMOUR TO JOKES. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENDIX* 
FRANZ BRENT ANO* S RtOOLES. 

JONE S 

OR. ERNEST JONES ION HIS 50TH 8IRTHOAY). 

JUOGING 

INTRODUCTION OF THE EGO PRIMARY AMO SECONOARY PROCESS 
IN PSl I COGNITION ANO REPRODUCTIVE THOUGHT! REMEMBERING 
ANO JUOGINGJ THOUGHT ANO REALITY. 

JUNG 

ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. 
DEPARTURES OF JUNG AND AOLLR. 

JUSTIFICATION 

LEONAROO-OA-VINCI AND A MEMORY OF HIS CHILOHOOD. 
JUSTIFICATION OF PAIHOB I OGRAPHY. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGV. THE UNCONSCIOUS. 
JUSTIFICATION FOR THE CONCEPT OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

KATH ARINA 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES* KATHARlNA. 

KEY 

PROJECT FOR A SCIENTIFIC PSYCHOLOGY; EOl TOR'S 
INTRODUCTION AND KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS IN THE PROJECT. 

KNOWLEOGE 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. THE FORGETTING OS 
IMPRESSIONS AND INTENTIONS. THE FORGETTING OF 
IMPRESSIONS AND KNOWLEOGE. 

KRAUSS 

LETTER TO OR. FRIEDRICH S. KRAJSS ON ANTHROPOPHYTE I A. 
LATENCY 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY; THE PERIOD OF SEXUAL LATENCY IN CHILOHOOD 
ANO ITS INTERRUPTIONS. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM; THREE ESSAYS. MOSES* HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE LATENCY PERtOO ANO 
TRAOt TION. 

LATENT 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOTHERAPY. OREAMS. THE 
MANIFEST CONTENT OF DREAMS ANO THE LATENT 
ORE AH-TH OUGHTS. 

LE-0ON* S 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY AND THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. LE-B0N<S 



CDNTINUATIO LE-BON* S 

DESCRIPTION OF THE GROUP MlNO. 
1905C 8/ 70 LE-DISQUE-VEAT 

LETTER TO LE-DISQUE-VERT. 

1905C 8/ 81 LECTURE 



1905C 8/ 91 

1905C 8/1D2 

19D5C 8/117 

19D5C 8/128 

I9D5C 8/14D 

19D5C 8/159 
19D5C 8/181 

19D5C 8/199 

19D5C 8/2D8 

19D5C 8/221 
19D5C 8/237 

1929A2 1/249 

1950 A 1/322 

1914014/ 42 

191DC1 1/130 
1915E14/166 

18950 2/125 
I95DA 1/283 

I901B 6/134 
1910F1 1/233 

19D5D 7/173 
1939A23/ 66 

19I6X1S/H3 



FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FIRST LECTURE. 

SYMPTOMS HAVE PSYCHOLOGICAL HEANING. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. SECONO LECTURE. 
REPRESSION AND SYMPTOM FORMATION* 

FIVE LECTURES DN PSYCHOANALYSIS. THlRO LECTURE. PSYCHIC 
DETERMINISM* OREAMS. AND PARAPRAXES. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FOURTH LECTURE. 
INFANTILE SEXUALI TY AND NEUROSI S. 

five lectures on psychoanalysis, fif.h lecture. 

TRANSFERENCE AND RESISTANCE. 

LECTURES 

PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF CHARCOT S LECTURES ON THE 
OISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 

PREFACE ANO FOOTNOTES TO THE TRANSLATION OF CHARCOT S 
TUF SO AY LECTURES. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

FIVE LECTURES PN PSYCHOANALYSIS. FIRST LECTURE. 
SYMPTOMS HAVE PSYCHOLOGICAL MEANING. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. SECONO LECTURE. 
REPRESSION AND SYMPTOM FORMATION. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THlRO LECTURE. PSYCHIC 
DETERMINISM* DREAMS* ANO PARAPRAXES. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALY S I S. FOURTH LECTURE. 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY AND NEUROSIS. 



CONTI NUA T 10 
192 IC1 8/ 72 

1924A19/29D 

1910A1 1/ 9 

1 9 i OA 11/ 21 
191DAU/ 29 
1910AI1/ 40 
191DA1 1/ 49 

I886F 1/ 19 

IU92A 1/131 
191DA1 1/ 3 

191 DAI 1/ 9 

191 DA 1 1/ 21 

191 DAI 1/ 29 

1910A1 1 f 40 



AND RE SI S 


.TANCE. 




191DA1I/ 


49 


LECTURES 


DN 


PSYCHOANALYSIS. 




1916X15/ 


3 


LECTURES 


ON 


PSYCHOANALYSIS. 


PARAPRAXES. 


1°16X1 5/ 


15 


LECTURES 


DN 


PSYCHO ANALYSt S. 


PARAPRAXES. 


1916X15/ 


25 


LECTURES 


ON 


PSYCHOANALYSIS. 


PARAPRAXES. 


1916X15/ 


40 


LECTURES 


ON 


PSYCHOANALYSIS. 


PARAPRAXES. 


1916X15/ 


60 


LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 
AND FIRST APPROACHES. 


OREAMS. 


1916X15/ 


83 


LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 
3 TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION. 


1916X15/1D0 


LECTURES 


ON 


psychotherapy. 


OREAMS. THE 







MANIFEST CONTENT OF DREAMS ANO THE LATENT 
ORE AM-THOUGHTS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. 
CHILOREN S OREAMS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 
CENSORSHIP OF DREAMS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. 
SYMBOLISM IN OREAMS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 
ORE AM-WORK . 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. SOME 
ANALYSES OF SAMPLE DREAMS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 
ARCHAIC FEATURES AND INFANTILISM OF OREAMS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. WISH 

fulfillment. 

INTHOOUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. 
UNCERTAINTIES AND CRITICISMS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES; PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO PSYCHIATRY. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSIS. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. FIXATION TO TRAUMAS - THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEDRY 
OF THE NEUROSES. RESISTANCE ANO REPRESSION. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LI0IOO ANO THE 
SEXUAL ORGANIZATIONS. 



1916X15/113 

1916X15/126 

1916X15/136 

1916X15/149 

1916X15/170 

1916X15/104 

1916X15/199 

1916X15/213 

1916X15/228 

1916X16/243 

1916X16/257 

1916X16/273 

1916X16/286 

1916X16/303 

1916X16/320 



r 



S-21 



o 

ERLC 



210 



LECTURES 


CONT INUAT 10 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
DF THE NEUROSIS. SOHE THOUGHTS ON DEVELOPMENT ANO 
REGRESSION - AETIOLOGY. 


1916X16/339 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THF PATHS TO THE FORMATION OF 
SYMPTOMS. 


1916X16/358 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE COMMON NEUROTIC ST A T E. 


1916X16/378 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. ANXIETY. 


1916X16/392 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENFRAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE LIBlOD THEORY ANO NARCISSISM. 


1914X16/4I2 


Introductory lectures on psychoanalysis, general theory 

OF THt NEUROSES. TRANSFERENCE. 


1916X16/431 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
DF INF NEUROSES. ANALYTIC THERAPY. 


1916X 16/448 


Introductory lectures on psychoanalysis, inoex of 

PARAPRAXES. 


1916x1 6/47 B 


INTROOUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. INDEX OF 
OREAMS. 


1916X1 6/4 BO 


IN TROOUC TORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. INOEX OF 
SYMOOLS. 


1916X16/4B1 


NFW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES UN PSYCHOANALYSIS. 


1933A2 2/ 3 


NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. REVISION 

of the theory of dreams. 


1933A22/ 7 


NEW INTRODUCTORY ECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OkMMS ANO 
OCCULTISM. 


1933A22/ 31 


NFW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE 
OISSECTION OF THE PSYCHICAL PERSONALITY. 


I933A22/ 57 


NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. ANXIETY 
ANO INSTINCTUAL LIFE. 


I933A22/ 81 


NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 
FEMININITY. 


1933A2 2/1 1 2 


NcW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYST S- 
FXPLANAT IONS* APPLICATIONS ANO ORIENTATIONS. 


1933 A2 2/ 1 36 


NEW INTROOUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE 
QUESTION OF A WELTANSCHAUUNG. 


1933A22/138 


LEGAL 




PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FACTS |N 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. 


1906C 9/ 99 


PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THt EST SBL ISHMENT OF THE FACTS IN 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. 


1906C 9/103 


LEONAROO-O A-V (NCI 




L E ON AR 1)0-0 A-V INC 1 ANO A MEMORY OF HlS CHlLOHOOO. 


1910C11/ 59 


LEONAROO-OA-VINCI ANO A MEMORY OF Hi S CHlLOHOOO. 
BIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL. 


1910C 1 1/ 63 


LEONAROO-DA-VINCI ANO A MEMORY OF H|S CHlLOHOOO. 
LEONARDO* S CHlLOHOOO MEMORY. 


1 91 OC 1 1 / B2 


LEONAROO-DA-VINCI ANO A MEMORY OF HtS CHILDHOOD. SEXUAL 
INTERPRETATION OF LEONARDO'S CHlLOHOOO MEMORY. 


1910011/ 93 


LE ONAROO-UA-V IN C 1 ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILDHOOD. THE 
BLISSFUL SMILES IN LCONAROO'S PAINTINGS. 


19I0C1 1/107 


LEONARDO-OA-VINCI ANO A MEMORY OF HlS CHlLOHOOO. 
EFFECTS OF FATHER-LOSS ON LEONArfOO. 


l Q 10C 11/119 


LEONAROO-OA-VINCI AND A MEMORY OF HlS ChILOhOOD. 
JUSTIFICATION OF PaTHOBI OCR APHY . 


191 OC 1 1/130 


LEROY 




SOME OREAMS OF DESCARTES: A LETTER TO MA X ) ME LEROY. 


1929621/ 199 


LESSONS 




SOME ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN PSYCHOANALYSIS. ThF NATURE 
OF THE PSYCHICAL. 


1940023/279 


LETTER 




LETTER TO OR. FRIEORICH S. KRAUSS ON ANThRCPOPHYTE IA. 


19J0F1 1/233 


THOUGHTS FUR THE TIMES ON WAR ANO OEATH. OUR ATTITUDE 
TOWAROS DEATH. APPENOlX! LETTER TO OR. FREOER IK 
VANEEOEN. 


191S814/2B9 


LETTER TO DR. HEHHlNE VON-HUG-H ELLMUTh. 


19191 14/341 


LETTER TO SENOR LUl S LOPE Z-BALL ESTEROS Y OE TORRES. 


1923H19/2B9 


LETTER TO LE-Ol SQUE-VERT . 


1924A19/290 


LETTER TO FRITZ WlTTELS. 


1924G 19/286 


LETTER TO THE EOlTOR OF THE JEW I SH-PRES S-CENTRE IN 


$*22 



LETTER 

ZURICH. 

OR. RE I K ANO THE PR03LEM OE QUACKERY. A LETTER TO THE 
NEUE-FREI E- PR ESSE . 

DOSTOEVSKY ANU PARR tC IOE . A LETTER FROM FREUO TO 
THEODOR RE IK. 

SOHE OREAHS OF OESCARTES: A LETTER TO HAXlHE LERPY. 
LETTER TO T HE BURGOMASTER OF PRlBOR. 

LETTER TO GEORG FUCHS. 

WHY WAR?: LETTER FROM EINSTEIN. 

LETTER FROM FREUO. 

LETTER 14. I CO ITUS'* IN TERR UP TUS AS AN AET IOLOG ICAL 
FACTOR. I . 

LETTER 18. (EFFECT OF SEXUAL NOXAE.). 

LEI TER 21. (TWO CASE HISTORIES.). 

LETTER 22. (ORE AH AS ANALOGY TO 0* S DREAM PSYCHOSIS.!. 
LETTER 46. (FOUR PERIODS OF LIFE AND AETIOLOGY.). 
LETTER SO. (FUNERAL DREAM.). 

LETTER 52 . (STRATIFICATION OF MEMORY TRACES.). 

LETTER 55. (DETERMINANTS OF PSYCHOS IS. ) . 

LETTER 56. (HYSTERIA ANO WITCHES.). 

LETTER 57. (HITCHES ANO SYMBOLISM.). 

LETTER 59. (AGE OF HYSTERTCAL FANTASIES.). 

LETTER 60. (OREAM ABOUT FLtFSS.). 

LETTER 61. (STRUCTURE OF HYSTERIA.). 

LETTER 64. (TWO OREAMS.). 

LETTER 66. IOEFENSE AGAINST MEMORIES.). 

LETTER 69. (OOUBTS ABOUT THEORY OF NEUROSES.). 

LETTER 70. (FREUO S EARLY MEMORIES FROM 
SELF-ANALYSIS. ) . 

LETTER 71. (UNIVERSALITY OF OEOtPUS COMPLEX.). 

LETTER 72. (RESISTANCES REFLECT CHlLOHOOO.). 

LETTER 73. (CHlLOREN S SPEECH DURING SLEEP.). 

LETTER 75. (EROTOGENIC ZONES.). 

LETTER 79. (MASTURBATION* AOOtCTlON ANO OBSESSIONAL 
NEUROSI S.). 

LETTER B4 . I ORE AM S ANO PHYLOGENESIS.). 

LETTER 97. (CHlLOHOOO ENURESIS.). 

LETTER 101. (RETROSPECTIVE FANTASIES.). 

LETTER 102. (HYSTERIA ANO FANTASIES.). 

LETTER 105. (IMPORTANCE OF WISH FuLF ILLHFNT. ) . 

LETTER 125. (CHOICE OF NEUROSIS.). 

LETTER 39. ON THE PROJECT; THE NATURE OF 
LETTERS 

REVIEW OF WILHELM NEUTRA * S LEiTCRS TO NEUROTIC WOMEN. 
LIBERTY 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. MAN S CONFLICT WITH 
CIVILIZATION! LIBERTY VERSUS EQUALITY. 

LtBIOlNAL 

L I BIO INAL TYPES. 

LIBIOO 

three essays on the theory of sexuality, the 

TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE LlBtOO THEORY. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIOO ANO THE 
SEXUAL 03GANIZAT IONS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE LIBIOO THEORY ANO NARCISSISM. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. 

SUGGESTION ANO LIBIOO. 

TWO ENCYCLOPEO I A ARTICLES. THE LIBIDO THEORY. 

THE EGO ANO THE III . THE OE SCRIPT I VE ANO THE OYNAMlC 
UNCONSCIOUS. THE GRFAT RESERVOIR OF LIBIOO. 



CONTINUAT 10 
1925B 1 9/29 1 

2926121/247 

1 92 BB2 1/195 
1929B2 1/199 
1931E2 1/259 
I931F22/251 
193 3B 22/199 
1933B22/203 

19S0A 1/1B4 
1950 A 1/18B 
IM50A 1/199 
1°50 A 1/213 
19S0A 1/229 
1950A 1/233 
19S0A 1/234 
1950A 1/240 
1950 A 1/242 
1950A 1/243 
1950A 1/244 
1950A 1/245 
19S0A 1/247 
1950 A 1/253 
1950A 1/257 
1950A 1/260 

1950A 1/261 
1959A 1/263 
195 OA 1/266 
1950A 1/267 
1950A 1/268 

1950A 1/272 
1950 A 1/274 
195 OA 1/275 
1950A 1/276 
1950A 1/277 
1950A 1/27B 
1950 A 1/279 
1950A 1/30B 

19I0H11/23B 



1930A2 I / B6 
1931 A2 1/215 



19050 7/217 

1916X16/320 

I916X16/412 

192IC1B/ 8B 
1923A 1 B/.75 j 

1923819/ 60 



311 



CON! INUAT 10 



L I B I 00 

analysis terminable anc interminable, constitutional 

VARIABLES IN EGO. LI8IG0 ANO FREE AGGRE SSI VENCSS. 

LIES 

TWO LIES TOLO BY CHILOREN. 

LIFE 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. INOEX OF 
PARAPRAXES. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 

Sealing huh ihe problems of orerhs. ihe reunion of 

OKEAHS TO WAKING LIFE. 

THE P i YC HP P A T HO LOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
PROPER NAMES. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
FOREIGN WOROS. 

THE psychopathology of EVERYOAY life. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVEP.YOAY LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
NAMES ANO SETS OF WORDS. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. CHlLOHOOO 
MEMORIES ANO SCREEN MEMORIES. 

THE psychopathology OF EVERYOAY life, slips of The 
TONGUE. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. MISKEAOINGS ANO 
SLIPS OF THE pen. misreadings. 

THC PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. M ISREAOINGS AND 

slips of The pcn. slips of The pen. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LlfE. THE FORGETTING OF 
IMPRESSIONS ANO INTENTIONS. THE FORGETTING OF 
iMPKESStONS ANO KNOWLEOGE. 

THE psychopathology OF EVERYOAY life. The forgetting of 
IMPRESSIONS ANO INTENTIONS. THE FORGETTING OF 
INTENTIONS. 



CONTINUATIO 

I937C23/240 

191 3 G 1 2/303 
6/291 



1900A 4/ 


1 


|9I * D ft/ 


1 


1901 B 6/ 


B 


1901 B 6/ 


IX 


190 1 B 6/ 


15 


190 IB 6/ 


43 


1901B 6/ 


53 


1 901 B 6/106 


1901 B 6/(16 



LI TERATURE 

THE INTERPRETATION OF ORFAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LI TCRATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL OF 
OREAMS - MEMORY IN DREAMS. 

The INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. T HE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
DEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE STIMULI ANO 
SOURCES OF OREAMS. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURF 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. WHY OREAMS ARE 
FORGOTTEN AFTER WAKING. 

THF INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LltERATURC 
OEALING WITH .HE PROBLEMS OF ORE Al THE DISTINGUISHING 
PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OREAMS. 

IHE INItCPREUIlON OF ORE*HS. THE SCIENIl'IC LITERMUBE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE MORAL SENSE IN 
OREAMS. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
(N OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THEORIES OF 
DREAMING ANO ITS FUNCTION. 

THF INTERPRETATION CF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURF 
OEAl 1NG WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE RELATIONS 
BETWFFN OREAMS ANO MENTAL OISEASFS. 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. CRlTIQUF OF ANALYTIC LITERATURE ON 
FEMALE SEXUALITY. 



THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY life, bungleo act ions. 

the psychopathology OF EVERYOAY LIFE. SYMPTOMATIC ANO 
CHANCE ACTIONS. 

The psychopathology of everyday life, errors. 

The PSYCHOPATHOLOGY of EVERYOAY life, combineo 
PARAPRAXES. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. DETERMINISM* 

BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOME POINTS OF 
VIEW. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF F.VERYOAY LIFE. OETERMINISM* 

BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOME POINTS OF 
VIEW. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. OETERMINISM* 

BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOME POINTS OF 
VIEW. 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. INSTINCTUAL 
LIFE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS* ANO THE ORIGINS OF 
COMPULSION ANO OOUBT. 

ON NARCISSISM. NARCISSISM IN ORGANIC OISEASE* 
HYPOCHONORIA* ANO EROTIC LIFE. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE neuroses, the sexual life of human beings. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. OTHER 
ACCOUNTS OF COLLECTIVE MENTAL LIFE. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. ANXIETY 
ANO INSTINCTUAL LIFE. 

PREFACF TO MARIE BONAPARTE'S THE LIFE ANO WORKS OF 
EOGAR „LLEN POE I A PSYCHOANALYTIC INTERPRETATION. 

LETTER 46. | FOUR PERIODS OF LIFE ANO AETIOLOGY.). 

L I Ml T 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. SETTING A TIME 
LIMIT FOR TERMINATION • FACTORS WHICH MAY MAKE ANALYSIS 
INTERMINABLE. 

LIMITS 

SOME A001TI0NAL NOTES ON OREAM INTERPRETATION AS A 
WHOLE, the LIMITS TO THE POSSIBILITY OF 
INTERPRETATION. 

LINGUISTIC 

THE UNCANNY. LINGUISTIC APPROACH TO THE UNCANNY. 

literature 

rue INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE RELATION OF 
OREAMS TO WAKING LIFE. 



CASE 



1901 B 6/134 

1901 B 6/151 
1901B 6/162 

1901 B 6/191 
190 1 B 6/217 

190 IB 6/230 

190 IB 6/239 

190 IB 6/254 

190 IB 6/269 

1909010/237 

1914C14/ B 2 

1916X16/303 

192 1C 1 8/ 82 

1933A22/ B 1 

1933022/254 
1950A 1/229 

1937C23/216 

1925119/125 
1919H1 7/219 



little-hans 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IVE-YE AR-OLO BOY. 

HISTORY ANO ANALYSIS OF LITTLE-HANS. 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F I VE-YF AR-OLO BOY. 
(LITTLE-HANS). 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IVE-YEAR-OLO BC* . 

LITTLE-NANS CASE SHEOS LIGHT ON PHOBIAS. 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F iV E-YE AR-OLO BOY. , crotoT 
LITTLE-HANS CASE ANO ChIlOHOOO education, postscript. 

LOCATION 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF ThE COMIC. PSYCHICAL 
LOCATION 01 ST IN-'J ISHES JOKES FROM THE COMIC. 

LONOON 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES* J 

ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION: PREFATORY NOTES I (VIENNA) t 

tt (LONOON). 

lopez-ballesteros 

LETTER TO SENOR LUIS LOPF Z-BAL LE STEROS Y DE TORRES. 

LOSL 

THE LOSS OF REALITY IN NEUROSIS ANO PSYCHOSIS. 

LOVE 

A SPECIAL TYPE OF CHOICE OF OBJECT MAOE BY MEN. 
(CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 

ON THE UNIVERSAL TENOENCY 70 DEBASEMENT IN THE SPHERE 
OF LOVE. (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 

PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE . OBSERVATIONS ON TRANSFERENCE LOVE, 
(FURTHER R ECOMMENOA T I ON S ON THE TECHNIQUE OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS) . 

THE TABOO of VIRGINITY. (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE 
PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS Ol : THE EGO. BEING IN 
LOVE ANO HYPNOSIS. 

LUCY-R 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. CASE HISTORIES: MISS LUCY-R. 

MAGIC 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ANIMISM* MAGIC ANO THE OMNIPOTENCE OF 

THOUGHTS, animism, magic. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ANlMlSlMi MAGIC* OMNIPOTENCE OF 
THOUGHTS. OMNIPOTENCE OF THOUGHTS. TOTEMlSM IS A 
SYSTEM. 

MAJOR 

ORAFT 0. ON THE AETIOLOGY ANO THEORY OF ThE MAJOR 
NEUROSES. 

MALE 

OBSERVATION OF A SEVERE CASE OF HEM|-ANAESThESI A IN A 
HYSTERICAL MALE. 

PREFACE TO MAXIM STEINER'S ThE PSYCHICAL OtSOROERS OF 

hale potency. 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. FEMALE OEOIPUS COMPLEX OlFFERS FROM 
MALE. 



1 

S*23 



o 

ERIC 



213 



1900 A 4/ il 

1900A 4/ 22 

1900A 4/ 43 

1900A 4/ 4 B 

I900A 4/ 63 

1900A 4/ 75 

1900A 4/ BB 
1931021/240 

1909B10/ 22 
1 909B 10/101 
1 909R1 0/ 115 
1 909 B 10/ 14 1 

1905C 8/199 

1939A23/ 54 1 

1923H19/2B9 

1924E 19/1B3 

191 OH 11/163 
1912011/177 

1915A12/157 
191BAU/191 
1921C1B/1 1 1 

10950 2/106 

1712X13/ 75 
1912X13/ 05 

1950A 1/1B6 

18860 1/ 23 
191 3E 12/345 
193 IB 21/223 



1900A 4/ 



MAN 



melancholia 



CONI I NUAI 1 0 



CIVILIZATION ANO US OtSCONTENIS. MAN COPES WITH 
UNHAPPINESS THROUGH OIVERSION* SUBSTITUTION ANO 

INTOXICATION. 1930A21/ 7* 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OtSCONTENIS. NAN S CONFLICT WITH 
CIVILIZATIONS LIBERTY VERSUS EQUALITY. 1930A21/ 86 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISMS THRFE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 

ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. IHF GREAT MAN. 1939A23/107 

MAN'S 

CIVILIZATION ANO US OtSCONTENIS. MAN'S NEED FOR 

RELIGION ARISES FROM FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 1930A21/ 6* 

MANIFESTATIONS 

THREE ESS A> S ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 

SEXUALITY. THE MANIFESTATIONS OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 19050 7/179 
THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 

SEXUALITY. MASTURBATORY SEXUAL MANIFESTATIONS. 19050 7/185 

MANN 

TO THOMAS MANN ON HIS SIXTIETH BIRTH04Y. 1935C22/255 

MASOCHISM 

THE ECONOMIC PROBLEM OF MASOCHISM. 1924C19/157 

MASTURBATION 

CONTRIBUTIONS TO A OlSCUSSION ON MASTURBATION. 1912F12/239 

LETTER 79. IMASIURBATION. AOOICTION ANO OBSESSIONAL 

NEUROSIS. I . 1950A 1/272 

MASTURBATORY 

THREE ESSAYS CN THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 

SEXUALITY. MASTURBATORY SEXUAL MANIFESTATIONS. 19050 7/185 

HEALS 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHILOHOOO. 

RELATION OF TOTEM MEALS 10 FATHER ANO GOO. 1912X13/UO 

MEANING 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FIRST LECTURE. 

SYMPTOMS HAVE PSYCHOLOGICAL MEANING. 1910AII/ 9 

THE ANTITHETICAL MEANING OF PRIMAL WOROS. 1910E11/153 

MEANINGS 

PAPERS UN METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. VARIOUS 

MEANINGS OF THE UNCONSCIOUS - THE TOPOGRAPHICAL POINT 

OF VIEW. 1915E14/172 

MECHANISM 

OBSESSIONS ANO PHOBIAS; THEIR PSYCHICAL MECHAMISM ANO 

THEIR AETtOLOGY. APPENOtXl FREUO S VIEWS ON PHOBtAS. 3/ B3 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. ON THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF 

HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA; PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION. 1B93A 2/ 1 

ON THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA. 1893H 3 / 25 

OBSESSIONS ANO PHOBIAS; THEIR PSYCHICAL MECHANISM ANO 

THEIR AETIOLOGY. 1895C 3/ 71 

FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEUROPSYCHOSIS OF OEFENCE. THE 

NATURE ANU MECHANISM OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 1896B 3/166 

THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF FORGETFULNESS. 1Q98B 3/287 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE HECHANISH OF PLEASURE ANO THE PSYCHOGENESIS 
OF JOKES. 1 905C B/117 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MECHANISM OF PLEASURE ANO THE PSYCHOGENES I S 
OF JOKES. THE PURPOSE ANO FUNCTIONS OF JOKES. 1905C B/ 128 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA I OEMENT I A PAHANOt OESI . ON THE 

MECHANISM OF PARANOIA. 19UC12/ 59 

MECHANISMS 

SOME NEUROTIC MECHANISMS tN JEALOUSY. PARANOIA ANO 

HOMOSEXUALITY. 1922B18/221 

MEOICAL 

INTROOUCT ION TO THE SPECIAL PSYCHOPATHOLOGY NUMBER OF 

THE MEOICAL REVIEW OF REVIEWS. 1930C21/254 

MEDUSA'S 

MEDUSA'S HEAD. 1940C18/273 

MELANCHOLIA 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. MOURNING ANO MELANCHOLIA. 1917EU/237 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. MOURNING ANO MELANCHOLIA. 1917E14/243 



ORAFT G. MELANCHOLIA. 

MEMORIES 

SCREEN MEMORIES. 

the psychopathology of FVERYOAY LIFE. CHILOHOOO 
MEMORIES ANO SCREEN MEMORIES. 

LETTER 66. tOEFENSE AGAINST MEMORIES.). 

LETTER 70. (FREUO S EARLY MEMORIES FROM 
SELF-ANALYSIS. I . 

MEMORY 

THE INYERPRETAT ON OF ORE AMS ■ THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH TH PROBLEMS OF DREAMS. THE MATERIAL OF 
OREAMS - MEMORY IN OREAMS. 

LEONAROO-OA-V INC I ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILOHOOO. 

LEONAROO-OA- V I NC I ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILOHOOO. 
BIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL. 

LEONAROO-OA-VlNCI ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILOHOOO. 
LEONAROO'S CHILOHOOO MEMORY. 

LEONAROO-OA-V INC I ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILOHOOO. SEXUAL 
INTERPRETATION OF LEONAROO'S CHILOHOOO MEMORY. 

LEONAROO-OA-VINCI ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILOHOOO. THE 
BLISSFUL SMILES !N LEONAROO'S PAINTINGS. 

LEONAROO-OA-V INC I ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILOHOOO. 

EFFECTS OF FAT 1ER-L0SS ON LEONAROO. 

LEONAROO-O A-V I NCt ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILOHOOO. 
JUSTIFICATION OF PA THOB IOGR APHY. 

A DISTURBANCE OF MEMORY ON THE ACROPOLIS. 

LETTER 52. (STRATIFICATION OF MEMORY TRACES. I . 

MEN 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN 
HEN ANO WOMEN. 

A SPECIAL TYPE OF CHOICE OF OBJECT MADE BY MEN. 
ICUNTRIBUT IONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 

MENTAL 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE RELATIONS 
BETWEEN OREAMS ANO MENTAL OtSEASES. 

PSYCHICAL (OR MENTAL) TREATMENT. 

FUKMULAT I ONS ON THE TWU PRINCIPLES OF MENTAL 
FUNCTION! NG. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. OTHER 
ACCOUNTS OF COLLECTIVE MENTAL LIFE. 

MET A PSYCHOLOG I CAL 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. A MET APSYCHOLOGIC AL 
SUPPLEMENT TO THE THEORY OF OREAMS. 

METAPSYCHOLOGY 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY* 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENOIX A; 
FREUO ANO EWALO HERlNG. APPENOIX B! PSYCHO-PHYSICAL 
PARALLELISM. APPENOIX C: WORDS ANO THINGS. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. INSTINCTS ANO THEIR 
V (C ISS ITUOES . 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. INSTINCTS ANO THEIR 
VICISSITUDES. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. REPRESSION. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. REPRESSION. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY- THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

JUSTIFICATION FOR THE CONCEPT OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. VARIOUS 
MEANtNGS OF THE UNCONSCIOUS - THE TOPOGRAPHICAL POINT 
OF VIEW. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE U'iCONSCIOUS. UNCONSCIOUS 
EMOTIONS. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE 'JPCONSCIOUS. TOPOGRAPHY 
ANO OYNAMICS OF REPRESSION. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. THE SPECIAL 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SYSTEM UCS. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THE TWO SYSTEMS. 



S-24 

213 



1950A 1/200 

1899 A 3/301 

190 IB 6/ *3 
1950A 1/257 

1950A 1/261 

1 -IOOA 4/ 11 
1910C11/ 59 

19 1 DC 1 1 / 63 

1 910C1 1/ 82 

191001/ 93 

1910C 1 1 / 10 7 

191 OC 11/119 

19 10C1 1 / 130 
l<*36A22/239 
1950A 1/234 

19050 7/219 
1910HU/163 

I900A 4/ B8 
1905B 7/283 

191 1B1 2/21 3 

192 1C 18/ B2 

19 1 70 1 4/219 

14/105 

1891B14/205 

1915C14/1U 

1915C14/1 17 
1915014/141 
1915014/146 
1915E 1 4/ 159 

1915E14/U6 

191504/172 
1915E14/177 
1915E 14/1B0 
I915E1 4/186 
1915E14/190 



METAPSYCHOLOGY 



CONTtNUATIC MONOTHEISM 



CONTI NUATIC 



PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY 
OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 



THE UNCONSCIOUS. ASSESSMENT 



PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. A MET AP SVCHOLOG 1C AL 
SUPPLEMENT TO THE THEORY OF OREAMS. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHULOGY. MOURNING ANO MELANCHOLIA. 

PAPERS ON MF T AP SYCHOLOGY . MOURNING ANO MELANCHOLIA. 

METHOO 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE METHOO OF 
INTERPRETING OREAMS: AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAM. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE METHOO OF 
INTERPRETING OREAMS: AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAM 
I PREAMBLE ANO OREAM). 

INTRODUCTION TO PFISTER'S THE PSYCHOANALYTIC METHOO. 

% 

PREFACE TO RAYMONO OF SAUSSURE'S THE PSYCHOANALYTIC 
METHOO. 

MICHELANGELO 

THE MOSES OF Kl CHELANGELO . DESCRIPTION OF CRITICS. 

THE MOSES OF MICHELANGELO. FREUO S DESCRIPTION. 

THE MOSES OF MICHELANGELO. POSTSCRIPT. 

MIGRAINE 

ORAFT I. MIGRAINE: ESTABLISHED POINTS. 

MlNO 

STUOtES ON HYSTERIA. UNCONSCIOUS tOEAS ANO tOEAS 
INADMISSIBLE TO CONSCIOUSNESS - SPLITTING OF THE MtND. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. LE-BON'S 
DESCRIPTION OF THE GROUP MtND. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE PSYCHtCA’ APPARATUS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE THEORY OF THE INSTINCTS. 

AN OUTLINE OF F SYCHOANAL YS I S • THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL FUNCTION. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. PSYCHICAL QUALITIES. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THF MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. OREAM INTE.PRE TAT 1 ON AS AN ILLUSTRATION. 

Ml SREAOlNGS 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. Ml SREAOlNGS ANO 
SLIPS OF THE PEN. MlSREAOlNGS. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. MlSREAOlNGS ANO 
SLIPS OF THE PEN. SLIPS OF THE PEN. 

MITCHELL'S 

TWO SHORT REVIEWS. AVERBECK'S ACUTE NEURASTHENIA ANO 
WEIR MITCHELL'S NEURASTHENIA ANO HYSTERIA. 

MODIFICATION 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. MODIFICATION OF 
EARLIER VIEWS. 

MONOTHE I SM 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. A NOTE ON THE 
TRANSCRIPTION OF PROPER NAMES. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSFS AN EGYPTIAN. 

MUSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN: IF MOSES WAS AN EGYPTIAN. MOSES INTROOUCEO AN 
EXCLUSIVE RELIGION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. COMPARISON OF JEWISH ANO ATEN RELIGIONS. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. TWO GOOS ANO TWO MOSES. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. ONE HUNOREO YEARS OF HISTORY SUPPRESSED. 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. THE MUROER « MOSES. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION: PREFATORY NOTES I {VIENNA) C 
It ILONOON). 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM* THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
AND MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL PREMISS. 

MOSFS ANO MONOTHEISM* THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 



1915E 14/196 

1917014/219 
1917EI 4/237 
19 1 7E 1 4/243 

1900A 4/ 96 

197GA 4/1D6 
191 3B 12/ 32 7 

1922E19/2B3 

1 *142) 3/209 
1 914B1 3/222 
19 14B 1 3/229 

1950A 1/214 

18950 2/222 
1921C1B/ 72 
1940A23/144 
1940A23/14B 
1940A23/152 
1940A 23/ 1 57 
1940A2 3/165 

190 IB 6/1D6 
190 1 B 6/116 

1BB7B 1/ 35 

1926020/157 

1939A2 3/ 3 

1939A23/ 7 

1939A23/ 17 
1939A2 3/ 24 
1939A2 3/ 3D 
1939A23/ 36 
1939A23/ 41 
1939A2 3/ 47 

1939A23/ 54 
1939A23/ 59 



ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE LATENCY PERlOO AND 
TRAOITION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGI ON. THE ANALOGY. 

MOSES ANO MUNOTHEISM* THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
AND MONOTHEIST RELIGION. APPLICATION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. DIFFICULTIES. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS RELIGION 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. SUMMARY ANO RECAPITULATION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGI ON. THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE GREAT HAN. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
AMO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE ADVANCE IN 
INTELLECTUALITY. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGI ON. RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCT. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. KIS PEOPLE. 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. WHAT IS TRUE IN RELIGION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
AND MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE RETURN OF THE REPRESSEO. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSFS. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. HISTORICAL TRUTH. 

MOSES AMO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONUIHEIST RELIGI ON. THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT • 

MONOTNEl ST 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: TliMEE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO HGNOTHEIST RELIGI ON: PREFATORY NOTES I (VIENNA) t 
It (LONDON). 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGI ON. THE HISTORICAL PREMISS. 

MOSIS ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. HOSES* HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE LATENCY PERlOO ANO 
TRAOITION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM* THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGI ON. THE ANALOGY. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. HOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. APPLICATION. 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM* THREE ESSAYS. HOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. DIFFICULTIES. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS RELIGION 
ANO HONOTHE I ST RELIGION. SUMMARY ANO RECAPITULATION. 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM* THRFE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THF PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE GREAT MAN. 

M3SES ANO MONOTHEISM: THRFE ESSAYS. HOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE AOVANCE IN 
INTELLECTUALITY. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
AND MONOTHEIST RELIGION. RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCT. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE. 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. WHAT IS TRUE IN RELIGION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. HOSES* HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE RETURN OF THE REPRESSEO. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. HISTORICAL TRUTH. 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT. 

MORAL 

THF INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE MORAL SENSE IN 
OREAMS. 

SOME AOOITIONAL NOTES ON OREAM INTERPRETATION AS A 
WHOLE. MORAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE CONTENT OF OREAMS. 

MORALITY 

CtVlLlZEO SEXUAL MORALITY ANO MODERN NERVOUS ILLNESS. 

HO SE S 

THE MOSES OF MICHELANGELO. DESCRIPTION OF CRITICS. 

THE MOSES OF MICHELANGELO. FREUO S DESCRIPTION. 

THE HOSES OF MlCHFLANGFLO. POSTSCRIPT. 



S-25- 



ziA 



1939A23/ 66 
1939A23/ 72 
19J9A23/ BD 
I939A23/ 92 
1939A23/ 103 
1939 A23/1D5 
1939A23/107 

1939A23/1U 
1939A2 3/116 
1939A73/122 
1939A23/124 
1939A23/ 127 
1939A23/132 

1939A23/ 54 
1939A23/ 59 

1939A23/ 66 
1939A73/ 72 
1939A23/ BO 
1939A2 3/ 92 
1 939A23/1D3 
1939A23/ 10 5 
1939A23/1D7 

1939A23/UI 
1939A2 3/116 
1939A23/ 122 
1939A23/124 
1939A23M27 
193 9A 2 3/ 137 

19D0A 4/ 63 
1925119/131 

190 BO 9/lVi 

1 914B1 3/209 
19) 4B13/222 
1 914B13/229 



Mnsts 



CONflNUATIC 



MOVEMENT 



CONflNUATIC 



MPSES ANO MONOTHEISM: ThREF ESSAYS. A NOTE ON THE 
TRANSCRIPTION OF PROPER NAMES. 



ON The history of the psychoanalytic movement, early 

1 939A23/ 3 HISTORY. FRFUU WORKING ALOI'E. 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THRFE ESSAYS. MOSES AN EGYPTIAN. 1939A23/ 7 



HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: TH» EE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN: IF MOSFS WAS 'I EGYPTIAN. HOSES 1NTROOUCEO AN 
EXCLUSIVE RELIGION. 



1939A23/ 17 



ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. THE 
EARLY PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. 

ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. 
DEPARTURES OF JUNG ANO AOLER. 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM* THREt ESSAYS. IF HOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. COMPARISON UF JEWISH ANO ATEN RELIGIONS. 

MOSES ANO HONUTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF KOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. TWO GOOS ANO TWO MOSES. 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 
FGYPTIAN. 



HUROER 

I939A23/ 2* 

hoses ano monotheism: three essays, if hoses was an 

EGYPTIAN. THE MIIROER OF MOSCS. 

1939A23/ 30 

MYSTIC 

1939A23/ 36 A NOTE UPON THE MVST I f. WR ITING-PAD. 



19140*4/ 7 
1914014/ 25 
1914014/ 42 

I939A23/ 47 
1925A l 9/227 



hoses ano monotheism: three essays, if .uses was an 

EGYPTIAN. ONE MUNOREO YEARS OF HISTORY SUPPRESSED. I939A23/ *1 

MUSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THRFF ESSAYS. IF MOSES WAS AN 

EGYPTIAN. THE MUROER OF MOSES. I939A23/ *7 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSFS • HlS PEOPLE 
AND MONOTHEIST RELIGION: PREFATORY NOTES I IVIENNAI C 
II I LONOON) • I939A23/ 54 



MYTHOLOGICAL 

A MYTHOLOGICAL PARALLEL TO A VISUAL OBSESSION. !9l6dl4/337 

NAKEO 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL DREAMS* EMBARASSlNG OREAMS OF BEING 
NAKEO. I900A 4/242 



MOSES AND MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HtS PEOPLE 
AND MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL PREMISS. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: ThRFE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 

ano monoiheist religion, the latency perioo ano 

TRAOI T ION. 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MDSES. HtS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE ANALOGY. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. APPLICATION. 



1 9 3 9A 2 3 / 


59 


NAMES 

the psychopathology of evervoav 

PROPER NAMES. 


LIFE. 


THE 


FORGETTING 


OF 


19018 6/ 


1939A23/ 


66 


IMF PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERVOAV 
NAMES ANO SETS OF WOROS. 


LIFE. 


THE 


FORGE TTING 


OF 


19018 6/ 


1939A23/ 


72 


MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. A 
TRANSCRIPTION OF KIOPEft NAMES. 


NOTE 


ON THE 




1939A23/ 


1939A23/ 


80 


NARCISSI SM 













MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HtS PEOPLE 

ano monotheist religion, difficulties. I939A23/ 92 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: ThKcE ESSAYS. HOSES. HtS RELIGION 

ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. SUMMARY ANO RECAPITULATION. 1939A23/I03 



MOSES AND MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HtS PEOPLE 

ANO HONUTHE 1ST RELIGION. THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. I939A23/I05 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 

ANO MUNOTHEIST RELIGION. THE GREAT MAN. I939A23/I07 

MUSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HtS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. ThE AOVANCE IN 

INTELLECTUALITY. I939A23/III 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. MS PEOPLE 

ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCT. I939A23/II6 



ON NARCISSISM. 

ON NARCISSISM. OtSCUSSION OF NARCISSISM IN VARIOUS 
CONDITIONS. 

ON NARCISSISM. NARCISSISM INORGANIC OtSEASE. 

HV POC HONOR I A . ANU EROTIC L l r 'E • 

ON NARCISSISM. EGO-IOEAL. INHEPHOR OF NARCISSISM. 



I914C14/ 67 

1914C14/ 73 

191 AC 1 A/ 82 
191 ACT A/ 92 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERA*. THEORY 

OF THE Nfc UkOSE S ■ THE LIBIOO THEORY ANO NARCISSISM. I9I6X16/A12 

NATIONS 

PREFACE TO BOURKE'S SCATALOGIC RITES OF ALL NATIONS. 191 3K 12/333 



NATURE 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE. 

ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. WHAT IS ’.RUE IN RELIGION. I939A23/I22 



FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEUROPSYCHOSIS OF OEFENCE. THE 

NATURE ANO MECHANISM OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 1B968 3/168 



mdses ano monovheish: three essays, hoses, hi, people 
• o monotheist religion, the return of the represseo. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. HISTORICAL TRUTH. 

MOSES AND MONOTHEISM: THREE FSSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MUNOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HlSTORI'.AL DEVELOPMENT. 

MOTHER 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. GIRL'S PRE-UEOlPAL MOWVfS FOR 
TURNING AWAY FROM MOTHER. 



1939A23/124 
1 939A23/12 7 
1939A23/I32 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. INITIATION INTO THE NATURE OF 
THE TREATMENT. I RAT-MAN) • 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM 

The nature of totemism. 



N CHlLOHOOO. 



SOME ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE NATURE 
OF THE PSYCHICAL. 



LETTER 39. ON THE PROJECT I THE NATURE OF 
1931821/227 NEEO 



1909010/173 



1912X13/100 



1940823/2 79 
1950A 1/388 



FEMALE SEXUALITY. G’L’S PRE-OEOlPAL SEXUAl AIMS TOWARO 

MOTHER. 1931821/235 



CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTFNTS. MAN'S NEEO FOR 
RELIGtUN ARISES FROM FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 



1930A21/ 64 



MOTIVE 

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OE MONOLOG I CAL NEUROSIS. ThF 
MOT IVF FOR THE PACT WITH THE OEVIL. 

HOT I VFS 

jokes ano their relation to the unconscious, synthetic 

PART. THE MOTIVES 3F JOKES - JOKES AS A SOCIAL 
PKOCE SS. 





NEGAT ION 






NEGATION. 


1925H19/235 


1923019/ 79 


NERVOUS 






PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF CHARCOT S LECTURES ON THE 
DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM. 


1886F 1/ 19 


1905C 8/140 


CIVIL I Z EO SEXUAL MORALITY AND MOOERN NERVOUS ILLNESS. 


19080 9/177 



FEMALE SEXUALITY. GIRL'S PRE-UEOlPAL MOTIVES FOR 
TURNING AWAY FROM MOTHER. 



1931821/227 



PREFACE TO WILHELM STEKEL'S NERVOUS ANXIETY STATES AND 

THE ip TREATMENT. I90BF 9/230 



MOTOR 



neue-fre ie-pre;se 



SOME POINTS FOR A COMPARATIVE STUOY OF ORGANIC AND 
HYSTERICAL MOTOR PARALYSES. 

MOURNING 



CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE NEUE-FRE I E-PRESSE . 1903A 9/253 

1893C 1/157 

OR. REIK ANO THE PROBLEM OF QUACKERY. A LETTER TO THE 
NEUE-FRElE-PRESSE. 1926121/247 



PAPERS UN METAPSYCHOLOGV . MOURNING ANO MELANCHOLIA. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. MOURNING ANO MELANCHOLIA. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY. PAtN ANO 
MOURNING. 

MOVEMENT 

ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. 



1917E14/237 NEURASTHENIA 



19 1 7E 1 4/24 3 



1926D20/169 



1914014/ 3 



ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETAChING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE RESCRIPT ION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE TERM ANGST ANO ITS ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 3/116 

TWO SHORT REVIEWS. AVERBECK'S ACUTE NEURASTHENIA ANO 

WEIR MITCHELL'S NEURASTHENIA ANO HYSTERIA. 18878 1/ 35 

ON THE GROUNDS FOR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 



S-28 



215 



neurasthenia 



CONTI NUATK NEUROSES 



CONTINUATION 



NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

The CLINICAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY of ANXIETY neurosis. 

ON THE grounos for oetachtng a particular synorohe from 

NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
INCIOENCE ANO AETIOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

ON THE GROUNOS FOR DETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNDER THF DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
FIRST STEPS TOWAROS A THEORY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHlNG A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
RELATION TO OTHER NEJROSES. 

NEURONE 

FIRST PRINCIPAL THEOREM! THE QUANTITATIVE CONCEPTION; 
SECONO PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE NEURONE THEORY: THE 
CONTACT-BARP IERS • ThE BIOLOGICAL STANDPOINT: THE 

problfm or ouantity: pain; the problem of quality: 
CONSCIOUSNESS. 

NFUROPSYCHOSES 

the neuropsychoses of OEFENCE. APPENOIXS THE emergence 
OF FREUO S FUNDAMENTAL HYPOTHESES. 

the neuropsychoses of oefence. 

further remarks on the neuropsychoses of oefence. The 

SPECIFIC AETIOLOGY OF HYSTERIA. 

NEUROPSYCHOSI s 

FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEUROPSYCHOSIS OF OEFENCE. THE 
NATURE ANO MECHANIC OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 

FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEUROPSYCHOSIS OF OFFENSE. 
ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF CHRONIC PARANOIA. 

NEUnOSES 

ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHlNG A PARTICULAR SYNDROME FROM 
NFUR ASTHEN I A UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
RELATION TO OTHER NEUROSFS. 

HEREOITY /NO THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES. 

SEXUALITY IN THE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES. 

HY VIEWS ON THE PART PLAYEO BY SEXUALITY IN ThE 
AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF The NEUROSES: PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO PSYCHIATRY. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. FIXATION TO TRAUMAS - THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. RESISTANCE ANO REPRESSION. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. ThE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF The NEUROSES. THF DEVELOPMENT OF The LIBIOO ANO THE 
SEXUAL ORGANIZATIONS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

of the neuroses. The paths to the formation of 

SYMPTOMS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. ANXIETY. 

INIROOUCTORY LECTURES ON 1‘SYCHOANALYS IS. GENERAL THEORY 
DF THE NFUROSES. THE LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM. 

INTRODUCTORY ‘.ECTURES ON Pi YCHO ANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. TRANSFERENCE. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. Gfc Nl- RAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. ANALYTIC * HE3APY. 

INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE W4R NEUROSES. 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUDY. HYPNOSIS. HYSTERIA, ACTUAL 
NEUROSES. 

PREFACE TO HERMANN NUNBERG'S GENERAL THEORY OF ThE 
NEUROSES ON A PSYCHOANALYTIC BASIS. 

DRAFT A. I AETIOLOGY OF ACTUAL NEUROSES.). 

DRAFT B. » HE AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES. 

ORAFT 0. ON THE AETIOLOGY ANO THEORY OF THE MAJOR 
NEUROSES. 

ORAFT K. THE NEUROSES OF DEFENCE. IA CHRISTMAS FAIRY 
TALE.). 

LETTER 69. I0OUBTS ABOUT THEORY OF NEUROSES.). 

INTRODUCTION TU PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE WAR NEUROSFS. 
MEMORANDUM ON THE ELECTRICAL TR EATMEN1 OF WAR 



1 89 5i' 3/ 90 


NEUROTICS. 
NEUROSI S 


1 955C 17/21 1 


18958 3/ 99 


ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHlNG A PARTICULAR SYNOROHE FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE OESCRIPTIUN ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THC TERM ANGST ANU ITS ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 


3/116 


1B95B 3/106 


on the grounos for detaching a particular syndrome from 

NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE CLINICAL SYMP TOMA TOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 


IB95B 3/ 90 


IB95B 3/112 


ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHlNG A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
INCIOENCE ANO AETIOLOGY UF ANXIETY NEUROSIS* 


1B95B 3/ 99 




CJN THE GROUNOS FOR CETAChING A PARTICULAR SYNORUME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
FIRST STEPS TOWAROS A THEORY OF ANXIETY >;EUROSIS. 


1B95B 3/106 


1 950 A 1/295 


ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHlNG A PARTICULAR SYNDROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
RELATION TO OTHER NEUROSES. 


1B95B 3/112 




A REPLY TO CRITICISMS OF MY PAPER ON ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 


IB95F 3/121 


3/ 62 
1B94A 3/ 43 


FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEUROPSYCHOSIS OF OEFENCE. THE 
NATURE ANO MECHANISM OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 


1B96B 3/168 
19090:0/153 


1B96B 3/162 


NOTE* UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY l THE BEGINNING OF THE TREATMENT. 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 1 RAT-HAN) • 


1909010/ 15B 


1 B96B 3/16B 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM ThE CASE HISTORY. THE GREAT OBSESSIVE FEAR. 
(RAT-MAN) • 


190901C/165 


1B96B 3/174 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. INITIATION INTO THE NATURE OF 
THE TREATMENT. (RAT-MAN). 


1909010/173 


1B95B 3/112 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. SOME OBSESSIONAL 10EAS ANO THEIR 
EXPLANATION. (RAT-MAN). 


1909010/IB-, 


1B96A 3/141 
1B98A 3/261 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE PRECIPITATING CAUSE OF THE 
ILLNESS. (RAT-MAN). 


19090 1 0/195 


I906A 7/271 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE FATHER COMPLEX ANO THE 
SOLUTION (JF THE RAT IOEA. 


1909010/200 


1916X16/243 
1916X16/273 
1916X 16/2B6 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. THEORETICAL 
SECTION. SOME GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OBSESSIONAL 
STRUCTURE S. 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. SOME 
PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF OBSESSIONAL NC'JROTICS* 
THEIR ATT1TUOE TOWAROS REALITY. SUPERSTITION AND OEATH. 


1909010/221 

1909010/229 


1916X16/303 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. INSTINCTUAL 
LIFE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS, ANO THE ORIGINS OF 
COMPULSION ANO DOUBT. 


1909010/237 


191 6X16/320 


FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FOURTH LECTURE. 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY ANO NEUROSIS. 


1 910A1 1/ 40 




TYPES OF ONSET OF NEUROSIS. 


1912C12/227 


1916X16/358 


TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. 
PARALLEL BETWEEN TABOO ANO OBSESSIONAL NCURCJSIS. 


1912X13/ 26 


1916X16/37B 


The disposition to obsessional neurosis, a contribution 

TO THE PROBLEM OF CHOICE OF NEUROSIS. 


1913112/311 


1916X16/392 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSIS. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS. 


1916X16/257 


1916X16/412 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSIS. SOME THOUGHTS ON OEVELOPMFNT ANO 
REGRESSION - AETIOLOGY. 


1916X16/339 



1916X1 6/43 1 

191 6X16/44 0 
1919017/205 

1925020/ 19 

1932B21/25B 
1950A 1/177 
1 950 A 1/179 

19S0A 1/186 

1950A 1/220 
1 95 OA 1/260 



FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
REMARKS ABOUT THE WOLFMAN. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
SURVEY OF THE PATIENT'S ENVIRONMENT ANO OF 
OF THE CASE. IWOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
SEOUCT ION ANO ITS IMMEDIATE CONSEQUENCES. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
ANO THE PRIMAL SCENE. IWOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
01 SCUS S IONS • IWOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. IWOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
ANO THE CASTRATION COMPLEX. IWOLFMAN). 



191B817/ 3 



INTRODUCTORY 


191 BB 17/ 


7 


GENERAL 
The history 


1918817/ 


13 


Jhe 

(WOLFMAN). 


1918817/ 


19 


The ore am 


I91BB17/ 


29 


A FEW 


1918817/ 


48 


The 


1918617/ 


61 


ANAL EROTISM 


1918817/ 


72 


FRESH 

. (WOLFMAN). 


191 BB 1 7/ 


B9 



S27 



rr' 




216 






NEUROSIS 



CONMNUAT ION OBJECTS 



FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
RECAPITULATIONS ANO PROBLEMS. (MOLFMAN). 


I91BB 1 7/104 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. REVIEW OF THE PLEASURE 
PRINCIPLE. TRAUMATIC NEUROSIS ANO CHlLOREN S PLAY ARE 
REPETITIONS. 


1920G1B/ 7 


BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. TRANSFERENCE NEUROSIS IS 
A REPETITION. 


1920G1B/ 18 


A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OE MONOLOG I CAL NEUROSIS. 


1923019/ 69 


A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS. THE STORY 
OF CHRISTOPH HAIZMANN THE PAINTER. 


1923019/ 73 


A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OE MONOL OG 1 CAL NEUROSIS. THE 
MOTIVE FOR THE PACT WITH THE OEVIL. 


1923019/ 79 


A seventeenth-century oemonological neurosis, the OEVIL 

AS FATHER- SUBS T 1 TUT.E . 


192301S/ 83 


A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS. THE TWO 
BONUS. 


1923019/ 93 


A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS. THE 
FURTHER COURSE OF THE NEUROSIS. 


1923019/100 


NEUROSIS ANO PSYCHOSIS. 


1924B19/149 


THE LOSS OF REALITY IN NEUROSIS AND PSYCHOSIS. 


1924E 1 9/1B3 


LETTER 79. (MASTURBATION. AOOI C~ 'ON AND OBSESSIONAL 
NEUROSIS.). 


1 950A 1/272 


LETTER 125. (CHOICE OF NEUROSIS.). 


195 DA 1/279 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. AOOENOUMl 
ORIGINAL RECORD OF THE CASE. (RAT-MAN). 


1 9S5A 1 0/26 1 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. ORIGINAL 
RECORO OF THE CASE. (RAT-MAN). 


1 955 A1 0/259 


NEUROTIC 




REVIEW OF WILHELM NE UTRA ' S LETTERS TO NEUROTIC WOMEN. 


19 10M1 1/23B 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THt COMMON NEUROTIC STATE. 


1916X16/37B 


SOME NEUROTIC MECHANISMS IN JEALOUSY. PARANOIA ANO 
HOMOSEXUALITY. 


1922B 1 B/22 I 


NEUROTICS 




THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. THE SEXUAL INSTINCT IN NEUROTICS. 


19050 7/163 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. SOME 
PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS: 
THEIR ATTITUDE TOWAROS REALITY. SUPERSTITION ANO OEATH. 


1909010/229 


NOTES UP IN A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. INSTINCTUAL 
LIFE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS* AND THE ORIGINS OF 
COMPULSION ANO OOUBT. 


1909010/237 


INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE WAR NEUROSES. 
MEMORANDUM ON THE ELECTRICAL TREATMENT OF WAR 
NEUROTICS. 


1 9SSC1 7/21 1 


NEUTRA'S 




REVIEW OF WILHELM NEUTRALS LETTERS TO NEUROTIC WOMEN. 


19 10M1 1/238 


NON-PSYCHOLOGICAL 




THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEK C ST. 
THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST OF ThC 
NON-PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES. THE PHILOLOGICAL. 
PHILOSOPHICAL ANO BIOLOGICAL INTEREST OF 
t'SYCMQANALYS I S . 


1 913 J1 3/176 


THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TQ SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 
THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST OF THE 
NON-PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES. THE INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS FROM A DEVELOPMENTAL POINT OF VIEW. 


1913J13/1B2 


NORMAL 




ATTEMPT TO REPRESENT NORMAL PSI PROCESSES 


1950A 1/36D 


NOXAE 




LETTER IB. (EFFECT OF SEXUAL NOXAE.). 


1950A 1/IBB 


NUNBERG' S 




PREFACE TO HERMANN NUNBERG* S GENERAL THEORY OF THE 
NEUROSES ON A PSYCHOANALYTIC BASIS. 


1932B2 1/250 


OBJECT 




THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL 
OBJECT. INVERSION. SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 
ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS. 


190S0 7/136 


THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE FINDING OF AN OBJECT. 


19050 7/222 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SUUAL 
OBJECT. INVER S IUN ■ SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 
ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS. 


19050 // 1 36 


OBSERVATION 




OBSERVATION OF A SEVERE CASE OF HE M I -ANA E ST HE S I A IN A 
HYSTERICAL MALE. 


1B860 1/ 23 


OBSERVATIONS 




OBSERVATIONS ANO EXAMPLES FROM ANALYTIC PRACTICE. 


191 3H 1 3/193 


PARERS ON TECHNIQUE. OBSERVATIONS ON TRANSFERENCE LOVE. 
(FURTHER RECOMMENOAT IONS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF 
PSYCHOANALYSt S) . 


19 15AI 2/15 7 


OBSESSION 




A MYTHOLOGICAL PARALLEL TO A VISUAL OiSESSION. 


1916b U/337 


OBSESSIONAL 




FURTHER REMARKS OH THE N EUkUP SYCHU SI S OF OEFENCE. THE 
NATURE ANO MECHANISM OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 


1B96B 3/16B 


NOTES UPUN A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 


I 90901 0/153 


NOTES UPUN A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM VHt CASE HISTORY? THE BEGINNING OF THE TREATMENT. 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY. (RAT-MAN). 


19O9U10/I5B 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE GREAT OBSESSIVE FEAR. 
(RAT-MAN) . 


1909010/165 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. INITI/flUN INTO THE NATURE OF 
THE TREATMENT. (RAT-MAN). 


1909UI D/I 73 


NO IE S UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. SUME OBSESSIONAL IDEAL ANO THEIR 
EXPLANATION. (RAT-MAN). 


19D90ID/IB6 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEURUSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE PRECIPITATING LAUSE OF THE 
ILLNESS. (RAT-MAN). 


I 909010/195 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE FATHER COMPLEX ANO THE 
SOLUTION OF THE RAT IOEA. 


I909010/2DD 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. THEORETICAL 
SECTION. SOME GENERAL CHARACTER 1 ST I CS OF OBSE SS ION AL 
STRUCTURES. 


I 909010/22 I 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. SOME 
PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS: 
THEIR ATTITUDE TOWAROS REALITY, SUPERSTITION ANO OEATH. 


1909010/229 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. INSTINCTUAL 
LIFE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS. ANO THE CRIGINS OF 
COMPULSION ANO COUBT. 


1909010/237 


TOIEM ANO TABOO. TABOO AND EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. 
PARALLEL BETWEEN TABOO ANO UBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 


1912X13/ 26 


THE DISPOSITION TO OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. A CONTRIBUTION 
TO THE PROBLEM OF CHOICE OF NEUROSIS. 


19131 12/31 I 


FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE 
OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. (WOLFMAN). 


191bbI7/ 61 


LETTER 79. (MASTURBATION. AOOICTION AND OBSESSIONAL 
KiUROS IS.). 


195 DA 1/272 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESS IUNAL NEUROSIS. ASGENOUM? 
ORIGINAL RECORO OF THE CASE. (RAT-MAN). 


1 955A10/25 I 


NOTES UPUN A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. ORIGINAL 
RECURO OF THE CASE. (RAT-MAN). 


19S5A1D/259 


OBSESSIONS 




OBSESSIONS ANO PHOBIAS* THEIR PSYCHICAL MECHANISM ANO 
THEIR AETIOLOGY. APPENOlXI FREUD S VlEl.i ON PHOBIAS. 


3/ 83 


OBSESSIONS ANO PHOBIAS? 1 HE IK PSYCHICAL MECHANISM ANO 
THEIR AETIOLOGY. 


1B95C 3/ 71 


OBSESSIVE 




OBSESSIVE ACTIONS AND RELIGIOUS PRACTICES. 


1907b 9/1 15 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF UBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE GREAT OBSESSIVE FEAR. 
(RAT-MAN) . 


I9090I0/I6S 


OCCULT 




SOME AOOIT IONAL NOT.ES ON OREAM INTERPRETATION AS A 
WHOLE. THE OCCULT SIGNIFICANCE OF OREAMS. 


1925119/ 135 


OCCULTISM 




NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES UN PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS AND 
OCCULTISM. 


1933A22/ 31 



1910H11/163 

S-28 




A SPECIAL TYPE OF CHOICE OF OBJECT MAOE BY MEN 
(CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY CF LOVE). 



OEDIPUS 



CONTINUATION 



i 



0 JTL INE 



IUIEM ANO TABOO. RETURN DF TOIEMlSH IN CHILDHOOD. 

OEUIPUS COMPLEX ANO SJCIElY. I9I2X1 3/15 5 

THE DISSOLUTION OF THE OEDIPUS COMPLEX. I924UI9/I73 

FEMALE S'iXUAL I IV • FEMALE DEDIPUS COMPLEX OIFFERS FROM 

MALE. 1931 02 1 / 22 3 

LETTER 71. (UNIVERSAL I TV OF OEDIPUS COMPLEX.). /950A 1/263 

OMNI POTENCE 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ANIMISM. MAGIC AND THE OMNIPOTENCE OF 

THOUGHT"*. ANIMISM. MAGIC. 1912X13/ 75 

TOTEM AND TABOO. ANlMlSlMt MAGICt OMNIPOTENCE OF 
THUUGHTS. OMNIPOTENCE DF THOUGHTS. IOTEMISM IS A 

SYSTEM. 1912X13/ 85 

OPPENHE IM 

DREAMS IN FOLKLURE IFREUO AND UPPENHE I Ml . I957AI 2/175 

OPPOSI TE 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION ID THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. REPRESENTATION BY 

OPPOSITE; CONCEPTUAL JUKES. 1905C 8/ 70 

ORGANIC 

SOME POINTS FOR A COMPARATIVE STUOY 0" ORGANIC ANO 

HYSTERICAL MOTOR PARALYSES. IB93C I/I 5 7 

ON NARCISSISM. NARCISSISM IN ORGANIC OISEASE* 

HY POCHONOR I A . ANO EROTIC LIFE. I914CI4/ 82 

ORGAN 1 2 AT I ON 

three essays on the theory of sexuality, infantile 
sexuality. The phases of development of The sexual 

ORGANIZATION. 19050 7/197 

IhE INFANTILE GENITAL ORGAN 1ZAI ION; AN I N T FRPOL AT ION 

into the theory of sexualiiv. I923ti9/I4i 

ORGANIZATIONS 

INTMUOUCTURY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

of the neuroses, the development of the lisjoo and the 

SEXUAL URGAN I ZAT IONS. 1916X16/320 

ORIENTATIONS 

NEW I N TMOOUC TOR V LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

EXPLANATIONS. APPLICATIONS ANO ORIENT AT IONS. I933A22/136 

UR I G I N 

TA80U ANO TOTEM. THE RETURN UF TOT EMI SM IN CHILDREN. 

THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMlSM! THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY ANO ITS 



AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YIELD. 
THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS AND THE EXTERNAL hORLO. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YlELO. 
THE I NTERNAL WORLD. 



PACT 



RELATION to 


1 TOTEMlSM. 










I9I2XI 3/108 


A CHlLO IS 
THfc OF 1 GIN 


8EING BEATEN; A CONTRIBUTION 
DF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 


TO 


THE 


STUDY 


OF 


I9I9E 17/175 


A CHILU IS 
THE ORIGIN 


BEING BEATEN; A CONTRIBUTION 
OF SEXUAL PERVER IONS. 


TO 


■THE 


STUDY 


OF 


I9I9EI 7/1 79 


A CHlLO IS 
THE ORIGIN 


BEING BEATEN; A CONTRIBUTION 
OF SEXUAL PERVERSI UNS. 


TC 


JHE 


STUOY 


OF 


I9I9EI 7/186 


A CHILD IS 
THE ORIGIN 


BEING SEAT EN; A CONTRIBUTION 
OF SEXUAL PERVER $4 ONS. 


TO 


IHE 


STUOY 


OF 


I9I9EI 7/195 



ORIGINATES 

DRAFT E. HOW ANXIETY ORIGINATES. 

ORIGINS 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. INSTINCTUAL 
LIFE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS* AND THE ORIGINS OF 
COMPULSION ANO OOUOI. 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. ORIGINS OF RELIGIONS. 
OUTLINE 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE Ml NO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 

workings. The theory of the instincts. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANU ITS 
WORKINGS. THE DEVELOPMENT UF THE SEXUAL FUNCTION. 

AN OUTLINE of PSVCHUANALVSIS, THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. PSYCHICAL QUALITIES. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. UREAM INTERPRETATION AS AN ILLUSTRATION. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE PRACTICAL TASK. THE 
TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE PRACTICAL TASK. AN 
EXAMPLE OF PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 



I950A I / 1 8 9 

1 909DI 0/237 

• 

192 7C 21/ 21 

I940A2 3/141 
1940A23/I44 
I940A23/I 48 
I940A23/I 52 
I940A23/I57 
1940A23/165 
1940A23/172 
I940A23/I83 



A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY DEHDNULOG ICAL NEUROSIS. THE 
MOTIVE r-OM HE PACT WITH ThE OEVIL. 



PAIN 



INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY. 
MOURNING. 



P*!N ANU 



FIRST PRINCIPAL ThEUKEH: THE QUANTITATIVE CONCEPTION* 
SECONO PRINCIPAL THEOREM: I HE NEURONE THEORY; THE 
CUNT ACT'BARRI ERS. THE 81 OLUGICAL STANDPOINT; THfc 
PROBLEM UF QUANTITY; PAIN; THE PROBLEM OF QUALITY; 
CONSCIOUSNESS. 

THE FUNCTIONING OF THE APPARATUS; THE PATHS OF 

conduction; the experience of satisfaction; the 

EXPERIENCE OF PAIN5 AFFECTS ANO WISHFUL STATES. 

PAINTER 

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY DEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS. THE STORY 
OF CHRISTOPH HAIZHANN THE PAINTER. 

PAINTINGS 

LEONAROO-OA-VINCI AND A MEMGRY OF HIS CHlLDHOOO. THE 
BLISSFUL SMILES IN LEONARDO’S PAINTINGS. 

PARALLEL 

10TEM ANO TABOO. TA80U AND EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. 
PARALLEL BETWEEN TABOO AND OBSESSIONAL NEURC'IS. 

A MYTHOLOGICAL PARALLEL TO A VISUAL OBSESSION. 

PARALLEL ISM 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENDIX A: 
FREUO ANO EHALO HERING. APPENDIX 81 PSYCHO-PHYS ICAL 
PARA‘.LEL ISM. APPENOIX CJ WOROS AND IHINGS. 

PARALYSES 

SOME POINTS FOR A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF ORGANIC ANO 
HYSTERICAL MUTOR PARALYSES. 

PARANOIA 

FURTHER remarks on the neuropsychosi s of offense. 
ANALYSIS OF A CASE OF CHRONIC PARANUIA. 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NUTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCCUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA (DEMENTIA PARANOIOES). 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
* CASE OF PARANOIA (DEMENTIA PARANOIOES). SCHKEBER. 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON A AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF A 
CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). ATTfMPTS AT 
INTERPRETATION. 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). ON THE 
MECHANISM OF PARANOIA. 

psychoanalytic notes on an autubiographi cal account of 

A CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). POSTSCRIPT. 

A CASE OF PARANOIA RUNNING CUUNTtM TO THE 
PSYCHOANALYTIC THEORY OF THE OISfcASE. 

SOME NEUROTIC MECHANISMS ID JEALOUSY* PARANOIA AND 
HOMOSEXUALITY. 

ORAFT H. PARANOIA. 

PARANOIOES 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOB I OCR APHTCAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). SCHRE8ER. 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON A AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF A 
CASE OF PARANOIA (DEMENTIA PARANUIOES). ATTEMPTS AT 
INTERPRE TATIUN. 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A LASE OF PARANOIA ( DEMENI I A PARANUIOES). UN THE 
MECHANISM UF PARANOIA. 

psychoanalytic notes on an autobiographical /ccount of 

A CASE OF PARANOIA (DEMENTIA PARANOIOES). POSTSCRIPT. 
PARAPRAXES 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. INOEX OF 
PARAPMAXES. 

The PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY LIFE. COMB I NEO 
PARAPRAXES. 



I940A23/I95 
I940A23/ 20 5 



1923019/ 79 



I926D20/I6? 



I950A 1/295 



I950A 1/312 



1923019/ 73 



I9I0CII/I07 



1912X13/ 26 
1916814/33 7 



1891 814/205 

IB93C I/I 57 

18968 3/174 
I9IICI2/ 3 
1 9 1 1C 1 2 / 12 

191 1 C 1 2 / 35 

I9IICI2/ 59 

I9I2AI2/ 80 

19 1 5F 1 4/26 1 

1922818/22 I 
I950A 1/206 

I9IICI2/ 3 
191 1 Cl 2/ 12 

I9IICI2/ 35 

J 91 1CI 2/ 59 
I9I2AI2/ 80 

6/291 
190 18 6/230 



$•29. 



rr' 



1218 



PAR.NPRAXE S 



CONTINUA! ION 



CONTINUAIIOI PEOPLE 



FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THIRD 



OETERMINISM. 

INfROnuCTURV 

INTRODUCTORY 

INTKDUUCTURY 

intruouctorv 

intkuouctory 

pakapraxes. 

PARIS 



ORE AMS. AND 
LECTURES ON 
LECTURES ON 
LECTURES ON 
LECTURbS ON 
LECTURES ON 



PARAPRAXES. 
PSYCHD ANALVSI S. 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

PS YC ioanalysis. 
psychoanalysis. 



lecture. PSYCHIC 

PARAPRAXES. 
PARAPRAXES. 

PAR APR A)' E S . 
PARAPRAXES. 
INOEX OF 



Rb PORT ON FREUU S STUDIES IN °ARIS AND BERLJN. 



191 OA 11/ 29 
1916X15/ 15 
1916X15/ 25 
1916X15/ AO 
1916X15/ SO 

1916X16/478 
1956A 1/ 3 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MUSES. HlS PEOPLE 

ANU monutheist religion, tmf. great man. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO HONOTHE 1ST RELIGION. THE ADVANCE IN 
INTELLECTUALITY. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. HOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANU MONOTHEIST RELIGION. RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCT. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE. 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. WHAT IS TRUE IN RELIGION. 

MUSES ANO MONUTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MUSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELlGluN. Tlif: RETURN OF THE REPRESSED. 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISMS TMKFF ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. HISTORICAI truth. 



PARRICIOE 

DOSTOEVSKY ANO PARRICIOE. 

OOSTUEVSKV ANO PARRICIOE. 

DOSTOEVSKY ANU PARRICIOE. A LETTER FROM FKEUO TO 
THEUUUR RE IK. 

PATHUBIOGRAPHV 

LEONAROO-OA-V INC 1 ANO A MEMORY OF HlS CHILOHOOO. 
JUSTIFICATION OF PATHOBI OCR APHY . 



MOSES ANU MONUTHbISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEUPLE 
192BB21/175 AND MONUTHEISl RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT • 



1928B21/177 

192BB21/195 



191 OC 11/130 



PERIOOS 

LETTER 46. <FOUR PERIUDS OF LIFE ANO AETIOLOGY. I. 
PERSON 

THE QUESTION of LAY ANALYSIS. CONVERSATIONS WITH AN 
IMPARTIAL PERSON. 

PERSONALITY 



PATHOGENIC 

TWO INSTANCES OF PATHOGENIC PHANTASIES RE VE ALEO BY THE 

patients themselves. 



NEW INTROUUCTORV LECTURES UN PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE 
DISSECTION OF THE PSYCHICAL PERSONALITY. 

191DJ1 1/236 

PERSONS 



PAT KOI OGICAL 

PATHOLOGICAL OEFENCE ThF HYSTERICAL PROTON PSEUOOS 
DETERMINANTS OF THE I PROTON PSF.UOOi) DISTURBANCE OF 
thought b; AFFECT. 



1950A 1/351 



PATHS 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

uf the neuroses, the paths to the formation of 

SYMPTOMS. 



1916X16/358 



THE FUNCTIONING OF THE APPARATUS! THE PATHS OF 

conduction: the experience of satisfaction: the 

EXPERIENCE OF PAIN: AFFECTS ANU WISHFUL STATES. 



1950A 1/312 



THE INTERPRETATION OF URbAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL URcAMS. DREAMS OF THE OEATH OF 
PERSONS OF WHOM THE OREAHbR IS FOND. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL 
OBJECT. INVERSION. SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 



PERVERSE 



three essays on the theory of sexuality, the sexual 

ABERRATIONS. REASONS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 
PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE PSVCHONEURUSE S . INTIMATION OF 



PATIENT'S 



PERVERSIONS 



FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. GENERAL 
SURVEY UF THE PATIENT'S ENVIRONMENT ANO OF THE HISTORY 

of The case. iwolfmanI. 

CONSTRLC T I ONS IN ANALYSIS. EVALUATING ThE PATIENT'S 
REACTIONS TO A CONSTRUCTION. 



1918B1 7/ 13 



1937U23/260 



PATIENTS 

TWO INSTANCES OF PATHUGENIC PHANTASIES REVEALEO BY THE 

patients themselves. 



191DJ11/236 



PEC UL I AR 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. CONSEQUENCES OF INSTINCTUAL 
RENUNCIATION. IN WHAI OObS THE PECULIAR VrtLUt OF 
RELIGIOUS IOEAS LIE. 



1927C21/ 10 



PECULIARITIES 



Three essays on the theory of sexuality* Th.* sexual 

ABERRATIONS. THE PERVERSIONS IN CcNERAL. 

A CHILO IS BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF 
THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 

A CHILO IS BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF 

the origin of sexual perversions. 

A CHILO is being beaten: a contribution TO The study of 

THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAl PERVERSIUNS. 

a’chilu is being beaten: a contribution to the study of 
the origin of sexual perversions. 

PFISTER' S 

introduction to PFISTER'S the PSYCHOANALYTIC method. 



NUTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 60ME 

psychulugical peculiarities of ubsessional neurotics: 
their attituue towards reality* superstition ano death. 



1909D10/229 



PHANTASIES 

HYSTERICAL PHANTASIES ANU THEIR RELATION TO 
BI SEXUALITY. 



PEN 

THE psychopathology of everyday life, misreaoings anu 
SLIPS OF THE PEN. MISREADINGS. 

the psychupatholugy uf evervoav life, misreadings and 
slips of the pen. slips of the pen. 

PEUPLE 

muses anu monotheism: three essays, hoses# his people 

ANU MONOTHEIST RELIGION: PREFATORY NUTES I IVIENNAI t 
II (LONOON). 

MUSES ANO MONOTHEISM; THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL PREMISS. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM* THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONUTHEIST RELIGION. THE LATENCY PERIOO ANO 
TRA01 TION. 

MOSES ANU MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSuVS. MOSES. Hi S PEOPLE 
ANU MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE ANALOGY. 



TWU INSTANCES OF PATHOGENIC PHANTASIES REVEALED BY THE 

patients themselves. 

PHASES 

Three essays on the theuay uf sexuality, infantiie 
sexuality. The phases of development of the sexual 
organization. 

PHENOMENA 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. ON THE PSVCHICA1 HECHANISM OF 

hysterical phenomena: preliminary communication. 

ON the psychical mechanism of HYSTERICAL phenomena. 

STUOIES UN HYSTERIA. ARE ALL HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA 
I OEOGENIC7 

phenomenology 

THE UNCANNY. PHENOMENOLUGY OF UNCANNY AFFECTS. 



190 IB 6/106 
1901B 6/116 

1939A2J/ 54 
1939A23/ 59 

1939A2T/ 66 
1939A23/ 72 



HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEUPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. APPLICATIUN- 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. DIFFICULTIES. 

MUSES ANU MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HlS PEOPLE 
ANO MONUTHEIST RELIGION. THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. 



1939A23/ BO 
1939A23/ 92 
1939A23/105 



PHILOLOGICAL 

THb CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 
|Hb CLAIMS UF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST (Jf THE 
NUN-PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES. THE PHILOLOGICAL. 
PHILOSOPHICAL ANO BIOLOGICAL INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 



S*3Q 



I939A23/I07 

1939A24/U1 
19 39A23/ 116 
I 939A23/I22 
1939A23/I24 
1939A23/127 
1939A23/I32 

I950A 1/229 
1926E20/179 
1933A22/ 57 

1900A 4/24B 
19050 7/136 

19050 7/170 

19050 7/160 
1919E 17/175 
I919E1 7/179 
1919E17/1B6 
1919E1V/I95 

191 3B 12/32 7 

1908 A 9/157 
1910J1 1/236 

19050 7/197 

1 893A 2/ 1 

189 3h 3/ 25 

18950 2/1 86 
1919H17/226 

1913J13/176 



213 



PHILOSOPHICAL 



POTENCY 



THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOAN AL Y SI S 10 SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 
THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO ThE INTEREST OF THE 
NON-PSYCHOLOCICAL SCIENCES. ThE PHILOLOGICAL* 
PHILOSOPHICAL AND BIOLOGICAL INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

PHOBIA 



PREFACE TO MAX IH STEINER* S T HE PSYCHICAL 0I6URDERS OF 
MALE POTENCY. 

PRACTISING 

1913J13/176 

PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. RECOMMENOAT IONS TO PHYSICIANS 
PRACTISING PSYCHOANALYSIS. 



ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IVfc-YE Ak-OLO BOY. 



1909b! 0/ 3 PRE-ANALYTIC 



ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IV E-YE AR-OLO BCY. CASE 
HISTORY AND ANALYSIS OF LITTLE-HANS. 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA *N A F I Vt- YE AR-OLO BOY. 
(LITTLE-HANS). 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F I VE- YE AR-OLO BCY. 
LITTLE-HANS CASE SHEOS LIGHT ON PHOBIAS. 

ANALYSIS OF A PHDBIA IN A F I VE-YEAR-OLO BOY. 
LIMLE-HANS CASE ANO CHILOHOOO EOUCATION. POSTSCRIPT. 



1909B 10/ 22 
1909BI0/101 
1909B10/L1 5 
1909610/ 1 4 1 



AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY • PRE-ANALYTIC PERIOD. 
PRE-OEDIPAL 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. GIR.L*S PRE-OEDIPAL MUTIVES FOR 
TURNING AWAY FROM MOTHER. 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. GIRL * S PRE-OEOIPAL SEXUAL AIMS TOWARD 
MOTHER. 

PREAMBLE 



PHOBIAS 

OBSESSIONS AND PHOBIAS: THEIR PSYCHICAL MECHANISM AND 
THEIR AETIOLDGY. APPENOIX: FREUO S VIEWS ON PHOBIAS. 

OBSESSIONS ANO PHOBIAS: ThEIR PSYCHICAL MECHANISM AND 
THEIR aetiology. 

ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A F IV E-YE AR-OLO BOY. 

li ttle-hans case sheos light un phobias. 

TOTEM AND TABOO. THE RETURN OF TGTEmISM IN CHIL0HOOD. 
ANIMAL PHOBIAS. SACRIFICIAL FEASTS. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. ThE METHOD OF 
INTERPRETING DREAMS: AK ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN UREAM 
(PREAMBLE AND DREAM). 

3/ 83 

PRECIPITATING 

1B95C 3/ 7 1 NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 

FROM THE CASE HlSTJJY.. ThE PkECIPI TATI NG CAUSE OF ThE 
ILLNESS. (RAT-MAN). 

1909B10/U5 

PREHISTORY 

1912X13/126 A NUTE ON THE PREHISTORY OF ThE TECHNIQUE UF ANALYSIS. 



PHYLOGENESIS 



premiss 



LETTER B4. (DREAMS ANC PHYLOGENESIS.). 195CA 1/274 MOSES AND MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES* HIS PEOPLE 

ANO HUNOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL PREMISS. 

PHYSICIANS 

PREMISSES 

PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. RECOMMENOAT IONS TO PHYSICIANS 

PRACTISING PSYCHOANALYSIS. 1912E12/109 INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. CREAMS. ThE 

PREhISSLS ANO TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION. 

PICKWORTH 



PR E MON I TORY 

PREFATORY NOTE TO A PAPER BY £ • PICKWORTH FARROW. 1926C20/280 

THE INTERPRETATION UF ORE AM S* APPENOIX A: A PREMONITORY 

PI LL AR S DREAM FULFILLED. APPENOIX B: LIST OF WRITINGS BY FREUO 

OtALING PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY WITH OREAMS. 

CIVILIZATION AND ITS OISCONTENTS. TWO PILLARS OF 

CIVILIZATION: EROS ANO ANANKE. 1930A21/ 99 PREPONDERANCE 



PLAY 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. REVIEW OF ThE PLEASURE 
PRINCIPLE. TRAUMATIC NEUROSIS ANO CHlLOREN S PLAY ARE 
REPETITIONS. 

PLAYEO 



three essays on the theory of sexuality, the sexual 

ABERRATIONS. REASONS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 
PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN ThE PSYCHONEUROSES. INTIMATION OF 
THE INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SEXUALITY. 

1920G1 8/ 7 

PRIBOR 



LETTER TO THE BURGOMASTER OF PRIBOR. 

MY VIEWS ON THE PART PLAYEO BY SEXUALITY IN ThE 

AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES. 1906A 7/271 PRIMACY 



PLEASURE 

jokes and their RELATION TO The unconscious, synthetic 
PART. The MECHANISM OF PLEASURE ANO THE PSYCHOGENESIS 
OF JOKES. 190 SC 



THREE ESSAYS ON ThE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. ThE PRIMACY OF THE GENITAL 
ZONES AND THE FORE-PLEASURE. 

B/117 PRIMAL 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MECHANISM OF PLEASURE ANO ThE PSYCHOGENESIS 
OF JUKES. THE PURPOSE ANO FUNCTIONS OF JCKES. 190SC B/12B 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. 1920G1B/ 3 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. REVIEW OF ThE PLEASURE 
PRINCIPLE. TRAUMATIC NEUROSIS ANO CHILDREN S PLAY ARE 
REPET IT IUNS. 1920G1B/ 7 

BEYONO. THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. TRANSFERENCE NEUROSIS IS 
A REPETITION. 1920G1B/ IB 



THE antithetical meaning of primal woros. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. ThE OREAM 
ANO THE PRIMAL SCENE. (WOLF MAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF A,V INFANTILE NEUROSIS. FRESH 
MATERIAL FROM ThE PRIMAL PERIOD - SOLUTION. (WOLFMAN). 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO ThE ANALYSIS OF ThE EGO. THE GROUP 
ANO THE PRIMAL hdroe . 

PRIMARY 



BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. SPECULATIONS ON THE 
OEATH instinct. 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. REVISION OF ThE THEDRY 
OF INSTINCTS. 



1920G18/ 24 



1920G18/ 34 



BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. BIOLOGICAL ARGUMENTS FOR 

OEATH INSTINCTS. SUMMARY. 1920G1B/ 44 



POE 



PREFACE TO MARIE BONAPARTE* S THfc LIFE ANO WORKS OF 

EOGAR ALLEN POE: A PSYCHOAN AL YT I C INTERPRETATION. 1933022/254 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. ThE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAM PROCESSES. ThE PRIMARY ANO SECONDARY PROCESSES - 
REPRESSION. 

INTRODUCTION OF ThE EGO PRIMARY ANO SECGNOARY PROCESS 
IN PS 1 1 COGNITION ANO REPRODUCTIVE THOUGHT) REMEMBERING 
ANO JUDGING) THOUGHT ANO REALITY. 

PRIMARY PROCfcS*: S - SLEEP AN!) OREAMS: THE ANALYSIS OF 
OREAMS) DRbAM CONSCIOUSNESS : FREUO S USE OF THE CONCEPT 
OF REGRESSION. 

PRINCIPAL 



POLICLINIC 

PREFACE TO MAX EITINGON'S REPORT ON ThE BERLIN 
PSYCHOANALYTICAL POLICLINIC. 

POPPER-LYNKEUS 



FIRST- PRINCIPAL THEOREM: ThE QUANTITATIVE CONCEPTION) 
SECONO PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE NEURONE THEORY) THE 
CONTACT-BARRIERS) ThE BIOLOGICAL STANDPOINT) ThE 
192 3G 19/2 B 5 PROBLEM OF QUANTITY) PAINS THE PROBLEM OF QUALITY) 

CUNSCIOU SNESS. 



JfSEF POPPER-LYNKEUS ANO ThE THEORY OF OREAMS. 
MY CONTACT WITH JOSEF POPPER-LYNKEUS. 



1923F19/261 

1932C22/21^ 



PRIZE 

the goethe prize. 

PRIZES 



S*31 



220 



191 3E 12/345 

1912 E 12/ 109 
1925020/ 7 

193 1 B 2 1/227 
19 3 IB 2 1/235 

1900 A 4/106 

1909D1 0/195 
192061 B/263 

193VA23/ 59 

19 1 oXl 5/100 

194 1C 5/623 

190 50 7/170 
1931E2 1/259 

19050 7/207 

1910E11/1S3 

191 SB 17/ 29 
191BB17/ B9 
1 92 108/ 122 

1900A 5/5BB 

195 OA 1/322 
1950 A 1/335 

195 0 A 1/295 
1930 E2 1/207 



A NOTE ON PSYCHOANALYTIC PUBLICATIONS ANO PRIZES 



1919C 17/267 



PROTON 



PROBLEM 

Three essays on the theory of sexuality, the 

TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE PROBLEM OF SEXUAL 
EXCITATION. 

THE DISPOSITION TO OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. A CONTRIBUTION 
TU The PROBLEM OF CHOICE OF NEUROSIS. 



The ECONOMIC PROBLEM OF MASOCHISM. 

OK. KE IK ANO THE PROBLEM OF QUACKERY. A LETTER TO THE 
NELIE-FRE I E-PRESSE. 

FIRST PRINCIPAL THEOREM: ThE QUANTITATIVE CONCEPTION*. 
SECONO PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE NEURONE THEORY I THE 
CONTACT-BARRIERS! The BIOLOGICAL STANDPOINTS The 
problem of quantity; pain: the pkublem of quality. 

CONSCIOUSNESS. 

problems 

the interpretation of oreams. the scuntific literature 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. ThE RELATION OF 
OREAMS TO WAKING LIFE. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SC IENT I F 1C L I T ERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF DREAMS. THE MATERIAL OF 
OREAMS - MEMORY IN OREAMS. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. ThE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE STIMULI ANO 
SOURCES OF OREAMS. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. WHY OREAMS ARE 
FORGOTTEN AFTER WAKING. 

THE INTERPRETATION Of OREAMS. ThE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. ThE DISTINGUISHING 
PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OREAMS. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH ThE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. ThE MORAL SENSE IN 
OREAMS. 

the interpretation uf oreams. The scientific literature 

IN DEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS . THEORIES OF 
OREAMING ANO ITS FUNCTION. 

THE INTERPRETATION UF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH ThE PRUBLEMS OF OREAMS. ThE RELATIONS 
BETWEEN OREAMS ANO MENTAL OISEASES. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
RECAPITULATIONS ANO PRUBLEMS. (WULFMAN) . 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF ThE EGO. FURTHER 
PROBLEMS ANO LINES OF WURK. 

FINOINGS* IOEAS* PROBLEMS. 

PROCEOURE 

FREUO S PSVCHANALVTIC PROCEOURE. 

PROCEEDINGS 

PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ThE FACTS IN 
LEGAL PKOCEEUINGS. 

PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ThE FACTS IN 
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS. 

PROGNOSIS 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. ALTERATIONS OF 

THE ego affect ppcgnosis. 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. FACTORS IN THt 
ANALYST AFFECT PROGNOSIS. 

PROJECT 

PROJECT FOR A SCIENTIFIC PSYCHOLOGY: EU I TOR'S 
INTRODUCTION ANO KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS IN ThE PROJECT. 

LETTER 39. ON THE PROJECT. THE NATURE OF 

PROPER 

The psychopathology of evervoav life, the forgetting of 

PROPER NAMES. 

jokes anc their relation to the unconscious, theoretic 

PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. COMIC THINGS 

are NOT proper in jokes; relation uf humour to jokes. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. A NOTE ON ThE 
TRANSCRIPT I UN OF PROPER NAMES. 

fKOSPECTS 

the future prospects of psychoanalytic therapy, 
prospectus 

pruspectus for schriften ZUR angewanoten seelenkunue. 

PROTECTING 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. PROTECTING 
AGAINST FUTURE CONFLICTS. 



1 9050 7/212 

1913112/311 
1924CI 9/ 157 



PATHOLOGICAL OEFENCE THE HYSTERICAL PROTON PSEUUOS 
DETERMINANTS UF THE (PROTON PSEUOOS I DISTURBANCE OF 

Thought by affect. 

PSEUOOS 

PATHOLOGICAL OEFENCE THE HYSTERICAL PK °J? N 0 
DETERMINANTS OF THE (PROTON PSEUOOSI DISTURBANCE OF 
THOUGHT BY AFFECT. 



1926121/24 7 PSI 



1950A 1/295 

1900A 4/ 1 

1900A 4/ 11 

1900A 4/ 22 

1900A 4/ 43 

I900A 4/ 4B 

1900A 4/ 63 

1900A 4/ 75 

1900A 4/ B8 

I910BI 7/104 

192IC1B.MOO 

1941F23/.V9 

I904A 7/249 

19G6C 9/ 99 
1906C 9/103 

1937C23/234 

I937C23/247 



I950A 1/2B3 
I950A 1/3BB 



19018 6/ 1 

1905C B/221 
1939A23/ 3 

191C01 1/139 

1907E 9/24 B 



I937C23/230 

S-32 



INTRODUCTION OF THE EGO PRIMARY ANO SECONOAKV .'’’JOCESS 
IN PSI*. CUGNITION AND REPRODUCTIVE THOUGHTS RtM EMdER lNl» 
ANO JUOGINGI THOUGHT ANO REALITY. 

ATTEMPT TO REPRESENT NORMAL PSI PR :ESSES 

PSVCHANALVTIC 

FREUO S PSVCHANALVTIC PROCEOURE. 

PSYCHE 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. CONCLUSIONS ABUUT 
EFFECTS OF CIVILIZATION UPON PSYCHE. 

PSYCHIATRY 

I NT RUOUC TUKY LECTURES UN PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF the neuroses: psychoanalysis anu psychiatry. 

PSYCHIC 

FIVE LECTURES UN PSYCHOANALYSIS. ThIRO LECTURE. PSYCHIC 
OETERMINISM. OREAMS* ANO PARAPRAXES. 

PSYCHICAL 

OBSESSIONS ANO PHOBIAS? THEIR PSYCHICAL MECHANISM ANO 
THEIR AETIOLOGY. APPENOIX? FREUO S VIEWS ON PHOBIAS. 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. UN THE PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF 
HYSTERICAL PHENOMENA: PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION. 

ON The psychical MECHANISM of hysterical PHENCMENA. 

OBSESSIONS ANO PHOBIAS? THElR PSYCHICAL MECHANISM AND 
their aetiulogv. 

The PSYCHICAL MECHANISM OF FORGETFULNESS. 

PSYCHICAL (OR MENTAL! TREATMENT. 

jokes anu their relatiun tu the unconscious, theoretic 

"ART. JOKES ANO ThE SPECIES UF THE COMIC. PSYCHICAL 
LOCaTTH*, distinguishes jokes from The CUMIC. 

PREFACE TU MAXIM STEINER'S THE PSYCHICAL CISOROERS UF 
MALE PUTENCV. 

SOME PSYCHICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE ANATOMICAL 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE SEXES. 

SOME PSYCHICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE ANATOM ILAL 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE SEXES. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE 
DISSECTION OF THE PSVCTICAL PERSONALITY. 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. ThE STRENGTH OF 

The instincts vis-a-vis The other psychical agencies. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. ThE MIND ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MIND ANC ITS 
WORKINGS. PSYCHICAL QUALITIES. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSVCHUANALVSI S. THE THEORETICAL YlELO. 

Ti(E PSYCHICAL APPARATUS ANO THE EXTERNAL WORLD. 

SOME ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE NATURE 
OF THE PSYCHICAL. 

PSYCHO-PHYSICAL 

PAPERS ON METAPSVCHOLOGV. THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENOIX A: 
FREUO ANO EWALO HERlNG. APPENOIX Bt PSV CHO-PHVS ICAL 
PARALLELISM. APPENOIX C: WOROS ANO THINGS. 

PSYCHOANALYSIS 

THE RESISTANCES TC PSYCHOANALYSIS. APPENOIX: EXTRACT 
FROM SCHOPENHAUER'S THE hORLO AS WILL ANU IUEA. 

PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FACTS IN 
LEGAL PRUCEEO INGS. 

PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FACTS IN 
LEGAL PRUCEEO INGS. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FIRST LECTURE. 
SYMPTOMS HAVE PSYCHULOGICAL MEANING. 

FIVE LECTURES UN PSYCHOANALYSIS. SECONO LECTURE. 
REPRESSION ANO SVMPTUN FORMATION. 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THlRU LECTURE. PSYCHIC 



3 

ERIC 



221 



I950A 1/351 

I950A 1/351 

1950A 1/322 
19SUA 1/360 

1904A 7/249 
193QA2I/134 
1916X16/243 
1910A 11/ 29 

3/ B3 

1893A 2/ I 
1893H 3/ 25 

IB95C 3/ 71 
1B98B 3/287 
1905B 7/283 

I9Q5C 8/199 
1913E12/345 
1925J19/243 
1925 J 19/24 B 
1933A22/ 57 
1937C23/224 
1940A2J/144 
1940A23/157 
1940A23/195 
1940B23/279 

1891 B14/205 

19/223 

1906C 9/ 99 

19Q6C 9/103 
1910A1 1/ 3 

191 0A1 1/ 9 

1910A 1 1/ 21 



t 



PSYCHOANALYSIS 



CONTINUATIO PSYCHOANALYSIS 



CONTI NUAT 10 



OETEKMINISM* OREAMS. ANO PARAPRAXES. 




1910A 1 1/ 29 


FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FOURTH 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY AND NEUROSIS. 


LECTURE. 


191 0A1 1 / 40 


FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FIFTH 
TRANSFERENCE AND RESISTANCE. 


LECTURE. 


1910A1 1/ 49 


PREFACE TO SANOOR FEKENC2I S PSYCHOANALYSIS: ESSAY', IN 
THE FIELO OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 


19100 9/252 


WILO PSYCHOANALYSIS. 




1910K1 1/219 



INTRUOUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE PATHS TO THE FORMATION OF 

SYMPTOMS. 1916X16/358 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE* 1916X16/370 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. ANXIETY. 1916X16/392 

INTRODUCTORY lFCTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. THE LIBIOO THEORY ANO NARCISSISM. 1916X16/412 



PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. THE HANOLING OF 
ORE AH- 1 N TER PRE TATI ON IN PSYCHOANALYSIS. 



19UE12/ 89 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. TRANSFERENCE. 1916X16/431 



PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. RECOMMENDATIONS TO PHYSICIANS 
PRACTISING PSYCHOANALYSIS. 



1912E12/109 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. ANALYTIC THERAPY. 1916X16/440 



A NOTE ON THE UNCONSCIOUS IN PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

PAPERS UN TECHNIQUE. ON 0EGINNINC THE TREATMENT. 
(FURTHER RECOMMENOATIUNS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS!. 



1912G12/25S 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS* INOEX OF 
PARAPRAXES. 



1916X16/470 



191 3C12/12 1 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. INOEX OF 
OREAMS. 



1916X16/400 



THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 

THE PSYCHOLOGICAL INTEREST OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 1913 J13/16S 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. INOEX OF 
SYMBOLS. 



1916X16/401 



THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 
THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST OF THE 

NON-PSV chjlogical sciences, the philological* 

PHILOSOPHICAL ANO BIOLOGICAL INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 



A DIFFICULTY IN THE PATH OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 
INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE WAR NEUROSES. 
1913 J13/176 ON THE TEACHING OF PSYCHOANALYSIS IN UNIVERSITIES. 



1917A1 7/1 35 
1919017/205 
1919J 17/169 



THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 
I HE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST OF THE 
NON-PSVCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES. THE INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS FROM A DEVELOPMENTAL POINT OF VIEW. 

« 

ON PSYCHOANALYSIS* 

PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. REMEMBERING* REPEATING ANO 
WORKING-THROUGH. (FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE 
TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS!. 



1913J 13/ 102 
1913M12/205 

1914G12/145 



PREFACE TO J. J. PUTNAM S ADDRESSES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

TWO ENCYCLOPEDIA ART I CL ES • PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

A SHORT ACCOUNT OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. BASIC THEORIES OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 



1921A10/269 
1923A1 0/234 
1924F 19/191 

1925020/ 29 
1925020/ 40 



PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. OBSERVATIONS ON TRANSFERENCE LOVE. 

(FURTHER RECOMMENOATIUNS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF 

PSYCHOANALYSIS!. 1915A12/157 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 1916X15/ 3 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. PARAPRAXES. 1916X15/ 15 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. PARAPRAXES. 1916X15/ 25 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. PARAPRAXES. 1916X15/ 40 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. PARAPRAXES. 1916X15/ 60 

INTRUOUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS* CREAMS. 

U I FT IC ULT I E S ANO FIRST APPROACHES. 1916X15/ 03 

INTROOUCTURY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS* OREAMS. THE 

PREMISSES ANO TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION. 1916X15/100 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS* OREAMS. 

CHILOREN S OREAMS. 1916X15/126 

INTRUOUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. CREAMS. THE 

CENSORSHIP OF DREAMS. 1916X15/136 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS* OREAMS. 

SYMBOLISM IN OREAMS. 1916X15/149 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOAN ALfSI S. OREAMS. THE 

OREAM-WORK. 1916X15/170 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. SOME 

ANALYSES OF SAMPLE OREAMS. 1916X15/104 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 

ARCHAIC FEATURES ANO INFANTILISM OF OREAMS. 1916X15/199 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. WISH 
FULFILLMENT. 1916X15/213 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. 

UNCERTAINTIES AND CRITICISMS. 1916X15/220 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES* PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO PSYCHIATRY. 1916X16/243 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSIS. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS. 1916X16/257 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. FIXATION TO TRAUMAS - THE UNCONSCIOUS. 1916X16/273 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. RESISTANCE ANO REPRESSION. 1916X16/206 



THE RESISTANCES TO PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

INTRODUCTION TO EOOAROO WEISS’S ELEMENTS OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

new INTRODUCTORY LECTURES UN PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. REVISION 
OF THE THEORY OF OREAMS. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS ANO 
OCCULTISM. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYS IS* THE 
DISSECTION OF THE PSYCHICAL PERSONALITY. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. ANXIETY 
ANO INSTINCTUAL LIFE. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 
FEMININITY. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON P SYCHOANALYS I S» 
EXPLANATIONS* APPLICATIONS ANO ORIENTATIONS. 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE 
QUESTION OF A WELTANSCHAUUNG. 

PREFACE TO RICHARO STERBA’S DICTIONARY OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS* 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MINO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS* THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MINO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS* THE THEORY OF THE INSJINCTS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MINO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS* THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL FUNCTION. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MINO ANO 4TS 
WORKINGS. PSYCHICAL QUALITIES. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MINO ANO <TS 
WORKINGS* OREAM INTERPRETATION AS AN ILLUSTRATION. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE PRACTICAL TASK. THE 
TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE PRACTICAL TASK. AN 
EXAMPLE OF PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 



1925E19/213 
1926F 20/26 1 

1931C21/256 
193 3A2 2/ 3 

1933A22/ 7 

1933A22/ 31 

1V33A22/ 57 

1933A22/ 01 

1933A 22/112 

1933A22/136 

1933A22/150 

1936022/253 

1940A23/141 

1940A23/144 

194OA23/140 

1940A23/152 

1940A23/157 

194QA23/165 

1940A23/172 

194OA23/103 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS* GENERAL THEORY AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YIELO. 

OF THE NEUROSES. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN BEINGS. 1916X16/303 THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS ANO THE EXTERNAL WORLD. 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. THE OEVELOPRENT OF THE LIBIOO ANO THE 

SEXUAL ORGANIZATIONS. 1916X16/320 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSIS. SOME THOUGHTS ON DEVELOPMENT ANO 

REGRESSION - AETIOLOGY. 1916X16/339 



AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YIELO. 
THE INTERNAL WORLO. 

SOME ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN PSYCHOANALYSIS* THE NATURE 
OF THE PSYCHICAL. 

PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO TELEPATHY. 



S*33 



1940A2 3/195 



1940A23/20 5 



1940023/279 

1941010/175 



222 



PSYCHOANALYSIS 



CONTINUATI 0 PSYCHOLOGICAL 



psychoanalysis ano telepathy. 

INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE WAR NEUROSES. 
HE HOKANO UH ON THE ELECTRICAL TREATMENT OF WAR 
NEUROTICS. 

PSYCHOANALYTIC 



I9410IB/1B1 THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAHS. THE OI8TINGUI SHlNG 
PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OREAMS. 1900A 4/ 4B 

195507/211 NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 60ME 

PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS: 

THEIR ATTITUOE TDWAROS REALITY* SUPERSTITION ANO OEATH. 1909010/229 



THE FUTURE PROSPECTS OF PSYCHOANALYTIC THERAPY. 1910011/, 39 

THE PSYCHOANALYTIC VIEW OF PSYCHOGENIC DISTURBANCE OF 

VISION. 1910111/209 



PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA 10EMENTIA PARANOIOES). 191102/ 3 



PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES UN AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES) . SCHREBER. 191102/ 12 



PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES CN A AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF A 
CASE OF PARANOIA 10EHENTIA PARANOIOES). ATTEMPTS AT 
INTERPRETATION. 191102/ 35 



FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FIRST LECTURE. 
SYMPTOMS HAVE PSYCHOLOGICAL MEANING. 

THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 
THE PSYCHOLOGICAL INTEREST OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSIGN. THE PSYCHULO G ICAL 
SIGNIFICANCE OF RELIGIOUS IOEAS. RELIGIOUS 40EAS ARE 
ILLUSIONS. 

PSYCHOLOGY 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAM-PRUCESSES. THE FORGETTING OF OREAMS. 



1910A1 1 / 9 



1913J13/16S 



1927C21 / 25 



1900A 5/509 



PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A ».ASE OF PARANOIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). ON THE 

MECHANISM OF PARANOIA. 1911C12/ 59 



PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES UN AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANUIA (OEMENTIA PARANOIOES). POSTSCRIPT. 

INTRODUCTION TO PFISTER'S r HE PSYCHOANALYTIC METHOO. 

F AUSSE -R ECONN A1SSANCE ( OE JA-RACON TE ) IN PSYCHOANALYTIC 
TREATMENT. 

ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. 



1912A12/ BO 
191 3B 12/ 32 7 

1914A13/201 
1914014/ 3 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
DREAM PROCESSES. REGRESSION. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAM PROCESSES. WISH FULFILLMENT. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAM PROCESSES. AROUSAL BY OREAMS - THE FUNCTION OF 
OREAMS - ANXIETY OREAMS. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAM PROCESSES. THE PRIMARY ANO SECONOARY PROCESSES 
REPRESSION . 



1900A 5/533 



1900A 5/550 



190OA 5/573 



1900A 5/5BB 



ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. 
HISTORY. FREUO WORKING ALONE. 


EARLY 


1914014/ 7 


ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. 
EARLY PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT • 


THE 


1914014/ 25 


ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. 
DEPARTURES OF JUNG ANO AULER. 




1914014/ 42 


A CASE OF PARANOIA RUNNING COUNTER TO THE 
PSYCHOANALYTIC THEORY OF THE OISEASE. 




1915F14/261 


SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC 
THE EXCEPTIONS. 


WORK. 


1916014/311 


SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC 
THOSE WRECKEO BY SUCCESS. 


WORK. 


1916014/316 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
OREAM PROCESSES. THE UNCONSCIOUS ANO CONSCIOUSNESS - 
REALITY. 


1900A 5/610 


OELUSIONS ANO OREAHS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. GRAOIVA ANO 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 


190 7 A 9/ 41 


A SPECIAL TYPE OF CHOICE OF OBJECT MAOE BY MEN. 
(CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY Cf LOVE). 


1910H1 1/163 


ON THE UNIVERSAL TENOENCY TO DEBASEMENT IN THE SPHERE 
OF LOVE. (CONTRIBUTIONS TO* THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 


1912011/177 


SOME REFLECTIONS ON SCHOOLBOY PSYCHOLOGY. 


1914F 13/24 1 


THE TABOO OF VIRGINITY. (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE 
PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 


191 BA 11/191 



SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 
CRIMINALS FROM A SENSE OF GUILT. 

LINES OF AOVANCE IN PSYCHOANALYTIC THERAPY. 

/ 

A NOTE ON PSYCHOANALYTIC PUBLICATIONS ANO PRI2ES. 

PREFACE TO REIX S RITUAL: PSYCHOANALYTIC STUDIES. 

PREFACE TO RAYMUNO l)E SAUSSURE'S THE PSYCHOANALYTIC 
METHOO. 

PREFACE TO TEN YEARS OF THE BERLIN PSYCHOANALYTIC 
INSTITUTE. 

PREFACE TO HERMANN NUNBERG* S GENERAL THEORY OF THE 
NEUROSES UN A PSYCHOANALYTIC BASIS. 

PREFACE TO MARIE BONAPARTE 1 S THE LIFE ANO W0> *S OF 
EOUAR ALLEN POE: A PSYCHOANALYTIC INTERPRETATION. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE PRACTICAL TASK. AN 
EXAMPLE OF PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 

PSYCHOANALYTICAL 

PREFACE TO MAX EITINGON*S REPORT ON THE BERLIN 
PSYCHOANALYTICAL POLICLINIC. 

PSYCHUGENESIS 



1916014/332 
1919A1 7/15? 
191907/267 
1919G1 7/257 

1922E1 9/2B3 

1930621/25 7 

1932B2 1/25B 

1933022/254 

1940A23/1B3 



1923G19/2BS 



INTRODUCTION TO J. VARENOONCK'S THE PSYCHOLOGY OF 



OAY-OREAMS. 










1921B1 0/271 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 




1921C1B/ 67 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 




192U1B/ 69 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANU THE ANALYSIS 
DESCRIPTION UF THE GROUP MlNO. 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


LE-BON'S 


1921C1B/ 72 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 
ACCOUNTS OF COLLECTIVE MENTAL LIFE 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


OTHER 


192106/ B2 


GROUP* PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 
SUGGESTION ANO LlBIOO. 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 




1921C1B/ BB 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 
ARTIFICIAL GROUPS: THE CHURCH ANO 


OF THE EGO. 
THE ARMY. 


TWO 


192106/ 93 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 
PROBLEMS ANO LINES UF WORK. 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


FURTHER 


19210 B/ 100 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 
IDENTIFICATION. 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 




1921C1B/105 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 
LOVE ANO HYPNOSIS. 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


BEING IN 


1921C1B/11I 


GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS 
INSTINCT. 


OF 


THE 


EGO. 


THE HERO 


19210 B/117 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATIUN TO THE UNCONSCIOUS- SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MECHANISM OF PLEASURE ANO THE PSYCHOGENESIS 
OF JOKES. 1905C B/117 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS* SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MECHANISM OF PLEASURE ANO THE PSYCHOGENESIS 
OF JOKES. THE PURPOSE ANO FUNCTIONS OF JCKES. 1905C 6/126 



THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMUSE XUAL IT.Y IN A 
HOMAN. 



1920A1B/146 



THfc PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 

HOMAN. 1920A1B/1S5 



THE PSYCHUGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
HOMAN . 



1920A1H/160 



THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 

HOMAN. 1920A1S/167 



PSYCHOGEN 1C 



GROUP PSYCHOLUGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. THE GROUP 
ANO THE PRIMAL HOROE. 



1921 06/122 



GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. A 
DIFFERENTIATING GRAOE IN THE EGO. 



192106/ 129 



GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. 
POSTSCRIPT. 



192106/134 



PROJECT FOR A SCIENTIFIC PSYCHOLOGY: EDITOR'S 

INTRODUCTION ANO KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS IN THE PROJECT. 1950A 1/2B3 



PSYCHONEUROSES 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. REASONS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 
PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE PSYCHONEUROSES. INTIMATION OF 
THE INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SEXUALITY. 

PSYCHOPATHIC 

PSYCHOPATHIC CHARACTERS ON THE STAGE. 



19050 7/170 
1942 A 7/305 



1910111/209 



S-34 



O 

ERIC 

himufinrrriTiaa 



223 



THE PSYCHOANALYTIC VIEW OF PSYCHOGENIC DISTURBANCE OF 
VISION . 



«. 



PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 



PUNS 



THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 
PAKAPRAXES. 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIrE. 


INOEX OF 






6/291 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 
PROPER NAMES. 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


ThE FORGETTING 


OF 


190 1 B 


6/ 


1 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 
FOREIGN WOROS. 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


THE FORGE (TING 


OF 


190 IB 


6/ 


B 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 






1901 B 


6/ 


IX 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY 
NAMES ANO SETS OF WOROS. 


LIFE. 


THE FORGETTING 


OF 


190 1 B 


6/ 


15 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 
MEMORIES ANO SCREEN 


OF EVERYOAY 
MEMORIES. 


LIFE. 


CH I LOHOOO 




1901 B 


6/ 


43 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 
TONGUE. 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


SLIPS OF IHE 




1901 B 


6/ 


53 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY 
SLIPS OF THE PEN. MISREAOINGS. 


LIFE. 


MISREAOINGS ANO 




190*. B 


6/106 


(HE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


MISREAOINGS ANO 











SLIPS OF THE PEN. SLIPS UF THE PEN, 



1901 B 6/116 



jokes and theik relation to the unconscious. ANALYTIC 

PART. THE TECHNIQUE UF JOKES. PUNSS ABSUROITY AS A ' 
JOKE TECHNIQUE. 

PURPOSE 

jokes ano their relation to the unconscious, analytic 

PART. THE PURPOSES OF JOKES. INNOCENT JOKES S SHUT. ANO 
THE PURPOSE OF JOKES. 

jokes ano their relation to the unconscious, a analytic 

PART. THE PURPOSE OF JOKES. HOSTILE. CYNICAL ANO 
SKEPTICAL JOKES. 

jokes ano their relation to the unconscious, synthetic 

PART. THE HECHANISH OF PLEASURE ANO THE PSY LHOGENES IS 
OF JOKES. THE PURPOSE ANO FUNCTIONS OF JOKES. 

PURPOSES 

jokes ano their relation to the UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE PURPOSES UF JOKES. INNOCENT JOKE&J SHUT ANO 
THE PURPOSE CF JCKES. 

► UTN AH 



THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


THE FORGEITING OF 




IMPRESSIONS ANO INTENTIONS. THE 
IMPRESSIONS ANO KNOWLEOGE. 


FORGETTING OF 


1901 B 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


THE FORGETTING OF 




IMPRESSIONS ANO INTENTIONS. THE 
INTENTIONS. 


FORGETTING OF 


190 IB 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


BUNGLEO ACTIONS. 


190 IB 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 
CHANCE ACTIONS. 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


SYMPTOMATIC ANO 


190 IB 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


ERRORS. 


190 IB 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 
PARAPRAXES. 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


COMBINEO 


190 IB 


THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 


OF 


EVERYOAY 


LIFE. 


OETERHINI SM • 





BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOHE POINTS OF 

VIEW. 190 IB 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. OETERHINI SH« 

BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOHE POINTS OF 

VIE*. 190 1 B 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. OETERHINI SH • 

BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SOHE POINTS OF 

VIEW. 190 1 B 



JAHES J. PUTNAH. 

6/134 PREFACE TO J. J. PUTNAP S AOORESSES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. 
OUACKERY 

6/151 or. REIK ano the problem of quackery. A letter to the 
NEUE-FREIE-PRESSE. 

6/162 

QUALITIES 

o/191 AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE HINO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. PSYCHICAL QUALITIES. 

6/217 

QUANTITATIVE 

6/230 FIRST PRINCIPAL THEOREM! THE QUANTITATIVE CONCEPTION; 

SECONO PRINCIPAL THEOREH: THE NEURONE THEORY; THE 

contact-barmiers; the biological standpoint; the 

PROBLEH OF QUANTITY; PAIN; THE PROBLEH OF QUALITY; 
6/239 CONSCIOUSNESS. 

QUANTITY 

6/254 FIRST PRINCIPAL THEOREHJ THE QUANTITATIVE CONCEPTION*. 

SECONO PRINCIPAL THEOREH: THE NEURONE THEORY! THE 
CONTACT-BARRIERS; THE BIOLOGICAL STANDPOINT; THE 
PROBLEH OF QUANTITY! PAIN! THE PROBLEH OF QUALITY; 
6/269 CONSCIOUSNESS. 



INTRODUCTION TO THE SPECIAL PSYCHOPATHOLOGY NUHBER OF 
THE HEOICAL REVIEW OF REVIEWS. 

PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF HYSTERIA: HYSTERICAL COMPULSION! THE 
GENESIS OF HYSTERICAL COHPULSION. 

PSYCHO SI S 

NEUROSIS ANO PSYCHOSIS. 

THE LOSS OF REALITY IN NEUROSIS ANO PSYCHOSIS. 

LETTER 22. (OREAH AS ANALOGY TO 0* S OREAH PSYCHCSIS.). 
LETTER 55. (OETERH INANTS OF PSYCHOSIS.). 

PSYCHOTHERAPY 

STUOIES UN HYSTERIA. THE PSYCHOTHERAPY OF HYSTERIA. 

ON PSYCHOTHERAPY. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOTHERAPY. OREAMS. THE 
MANIFEST CONTENT OF OREAMS ANO THE LATENT 
OREAH- THOUGHTS. 



QUESTION 



1930C2 1/254 


















THE 


QUESTION 


OF 


LAY 


ANALYSIS. 


CONVERSATIONS WITH AN 






IMPARTIAL PERSON 


I. 






1950A 


1/347 


THE 


QUESTION 


OF 


LAY 


ANALYSI S. 








THE 


QUESTION 


OF 


LAY 


ANALYSIS. 




1924B19/149 


















THE 


QUESTION 


OF 


LAY 


ANALYSIS. 




1924E 19/1B3 


















THE 


QUESTION 


OF 


LAY 


ANALYSIS. 




1950A 


1/213 


THE 


QUESTION 


OF 


LAY 


ANALYSIS. 




1950 A 


1/240 


THE 


QUESTION 


OF 


LAY 


ANALYSIS. 








THE 


QUESTION 


OF 


LAY 


ANALYSIS. 




1B950 


2/253 


THE 


QUESTION 


OF 


LAY 


ANALYSI S. 


POSTSCRIPT. 


1905A 


7/257 


















NEW 


INTRODUCTORY 


LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE 






QUESTION OF l 


\ WELTANSCHAUUNG. 





1916X15/113 QUESTIONNAIRE 



PUBER1 Y 



CONTRIBUTION TO A QUESTIONNAIRE ON REAOING. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALIT’'. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE PRIMACY OF THE GENITAL 
ZONES ANO THE FORE-PLEASURE. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBcRTY. THE PROBLEM OF SEXUAL 
EXCITATION. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE LlBIOO THEORY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN 
MEN ANO WOMEN. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE FINOING OF AN OBJECT. 

PUBLICATIONS 

A NOTE ON PSYCHOANALYTIC PUBLICATIONS ANO PRIZES. 

PUNS 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. SUMMARY ANO PUNS. 



RAT 

19050 7/207 NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE FATHER COMPLEX ANO THE 
SOLUTION OF THE RAT IDEA. 

19050 7/212 RAT-MAN 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
19050 7/217 FROM THE CASE HISTORY: THE BEGINNING OF THE TREATMENT. 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY. (RAT-MAN). 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
19050 7/219 FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE GREAT OBSESSIVE FEAR. 
(RAT-MAN). 



19050 7/222 



19 1907/267 



1905C B/ 45 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. INITIATION INTO THE NATURE OF 
THE TREATMENT. (RAT-MANI . 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. SOME OBSESSIONAL IOEAS ANO THEIR 
EXPLANATION. (RAT-MAN). 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIo. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY. THE PRECIPITATING CAUSE OF THE 
ILLNESS. (RAT-MAN). 



S-3S 




CQNTINUAT1U 
1905C B/ 47 

I905C 6/ 91 
I 905C B/102 
1905C B/12B 

1,05C B/ 91 

1919B17/271 
192 1A1 6/ 269 

19?- 121/247 

1940A23/157 

I9&0A 1/295 

1950A 1/295 

1926E20/179 
1926E20/IB3 
1926k 20/ 191 
1926E20/200 
1926E20/206 
I926E20/21B 
1926E20/229 
192 6E 20/2 39 
1927A20/251 

1933A22/15B 
19070 9/245 

1909010/200 

1909010/15B 
1909010/165 
1909010/173 
19090 10/ 1B6 
1909010/195 



455-5B2 0 - 72 - 15 



RAf-MAN 



CON! INUAT IQ RELIGION 



CONI INUAT 1 0 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. AOOENOUM! 
ORIGINAL RECORO OF THE CASE. <R AT-MANl • 



THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. IS RATIONALITY POSSIBLE. 
1955A1 0/25 1 RELATION OF RELIGION TO SCIENCE. 



NOTES UP UN A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. ORIGINAL 
RECORO OF THE CASE. I RAT-MANl . 



C I V I L I 2 AT I ON ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. HAN’S NEED FOR 
1955A10/259 RELIGION ARISES FROM FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 



RATIUNALITY 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. RELIGION IS A SUBSTITUTE FOR 
RATIONALITY. 1927C21/ *0 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. IS RATIONALITY POSSIBLE- 

RELATION OF RELIGION TO SCIENCE. 1927C21/ *6 



MUSES ano monotheism: three essays, if muses was an 
EGYPTIAN) if MOSES mAS an EGYPTIAN. MOSES INTROOUCEO AN 
EXCLUSIVE RELIGION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION: PREFATORY NOTES I (VIENNA) t 
II (LONOUN). 



REACTIONS 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. EVALUATING THE PATIENT’S 
REACTIONS TO A CONSTRUCTION. 

REAOING 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSESt HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL PREMISS. 

1937023/260 MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE LAIENCY PERIOO ANO 
TRAOI TION. 



CONTRIBUTION TO A QUESTIONNAIRE ON REAOING. 



19070 9/2*5 MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE ANALOGY. 



REALITY 

THE INTERPRETATION OF ORfcAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 

OKEAM PROCESSES. THE UNCONSCIOUS ANO CONSCIOUSNESS - 

REALITY. 1900A 5/610 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. SOME 
PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS: 

THEIR ATT ITUOE TOMAROS REALITY. SUPERSTITION ANO OEATH. 1909010/229 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONUTHE I ST RELIGION. APPLICATION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. OIFF ICULTI ES. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS RELIGION 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. SUMMARY ANO RECAPITULATION. 



THE UNCANNY. RELATION OF IMAGINATION TO REALITY. 1919H17/2*5 

THE LOSS OF REALITY IN NEUROSIS ANO PSYCHCSiS. 192AE19/1B3 

INTRODUCTION OF THE EGO PRIMARY ANO SECONOARY PROCESS 

IN PSi: COGNITION ANO REPRODUCTIVE THOUGHT) REMEMBERING 

ANO JUOGING) THOUGHT ANO REALITY. 1950A 1/322 

REASONS 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES* HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE GREAT MAN. 

MOSES ANO MUNOTHCISM! THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE AOVANCE IN 
INTELLECTUALITY. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 

ABERRATIONS. REASONS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 

PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE P SYCHCNEUROSES . INTIMATION OF 

THE INFANTILE CHARACTER UF SEXUALITY. 19050 7/170 

RECAPITULATION 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS RELIGION 

ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. SUMMARY ANO RECAPITULATION. 1939A23/103 

RECAPI TULA! IONS 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCT. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE. 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. WHAT IS TRUE IN RELIGION. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. HOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE RETURN OF THE RtPRESSEO. 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSESt HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION- HISTORICAL TRUTH. 



FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
RECAPITULATIONS ANO PROBLEMS. (WOLFMAN). 



MOSES ANO HUNOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
19IBB 1 7/10* ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE HISTORICAL 0EV6L0PMENT • 



RECOLLECTION 



RELIGIONS 



A CHILOHOOO RECOLLECTION FROM OICHTUNG UNO HAHRHEIT. 



1917817/1*5 THfc FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. ORIGINS OF RELIGIONS. 



XOKO MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM! THREE ESSAYS. IF MOSES MAS AN 

EGYPTIAN. COMPARISON OF JEWISH ANO ATEN RELIGIONS. 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. AOOENOUM! 

ORIGINAL RECORO UF THF CASE. (RAT-MAN). 1955AI0/251 RELIGIOUS 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. ORIGINAL 
RECORO OF THE CASE. (RAT-MAN). 

REFLECT 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. INHIBITIONS REFLECT 
RESTRICTIONS OF EGO FUNCTIUNS. 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. SYMPTOMS REFLECT 
INTERSYSTEMIC CONFLICTS. 

LETTER 72. (RESISTANCES REFLECT CHILOHOOO.). 



I955AI0/259 



OBSESSIVE ACTIONS AND RELIGIOUS PRACTICES. 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. CONSEQUENCES OF INSTINCTUAL 
RENUNCIATION. IN WHAT OOES THE PECULIAR VALUE OF 
RELIGIOUS IOEAS LIE. 



1926020/ B7 THE FUTURE UF AN ILLUSION. THE PSYCHOLOGICAL 

SIGNIFICANCE OF RELIGIOUS IOEAS. RELIGIOUS IOEAS ARE 
ILLUSIONS. 

1926020/ 91 

A RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE. 

1950A 1/266 

REMEMBERING 



REGRESSION 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
UREAH PROCESSES. REGRESSION. 



PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. REMEMBERING. REPEATING ANO 
WORKING-THROUGH. (FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE 
1900A 5/533 TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS). 



IN TROOUL TUR7 LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSIS. SOME THOUGHTS ON DEVELOPMENT ANO 

REGRESSION - AETIOLOGY. 1916X16/339 



INTRODUCTION OF THE EGO PRIMARY ANO SECONDARY PROCESS 
IN PSI) COGNITION ANO REPRODUCTIVE THOUGHT) REMEMBERING 
AND JUOGING: THUUGHT ANO REALITY. 



PRIMARY PROCESSES - SLEEP ANO OREAMS) THE ANALYSIS OF 
OREAMS) DREAM CONSCIOUSNESS) FREUO S USE UF THE CONCEPT 
UF REGRESSION. 1950A 



RENUNCIATION 

1/336 THfc FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. CIVILIZATION RESTS UPON 
RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCTUAL WISHES. 



REIK 

PREFACE TU RE IK S RITUAL: PSYCHOANALYTIC STUOIES. 

OR. REIK ANO THE PROBLEM OF QUACKERY. A LETTER TO THE 
NEUE-FRE IE-PRESSE . 

OOSTOEVSKY ANO PARRICIOE. A LETTER FROM FREUO TO 
THEOOOR REIK. 



1919G 17/257 



1 926121/2*7 



THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. CONSEQUENCES OF INSTINCTUAL 
RENUNCIATION. IN WHAT OOES THE PECULIAR VALUE OF 
RELIGIOUS I OCAS LIE. 

MOS?S AND MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEUPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCT. 



192BB2 1/195 REPEATING 



RELIGIUN 

THfc FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. RELATIONS BET WfcEN 
CIVILIZATION AND RELIGION. 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. RELIGION IS A SUBSTITUTE FOR 
RATIONAL I TY. 



PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. REMEMBERING. REPEATING ANO 
WORK ING-THRUUGH . (FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE 
TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS). 

1927C2 1/ 3* 

REPETITION 

1927C2 1/ *0 BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. TRANSFERENCE NEUROSIS IS 
A REPETITION. 



$*30 




1927C2 1/ *6 
1930A21/ 6* 

1939A2 3/ 17 

1939A23/ 5* 
1939A2 3/ 59 

1939A2 3/ 66 
1939A23/ 72 
1939A23/ 80 
1939A23/ 92 
1939A2 3/103 
1939A23/105 
1939A23/ 107 

1939A2 3/111 
1939A2 3/ 11 6 
I939A23/122 
1939A23/12* 
I939A23/127 
I939A2 3/132 

1927C2 1/ 21 
1939A2 3/ 2* 

1907B 9/115 

1927C2 1/ 10 

1927C2I/ 25 
192BA2 1/167 

191*012/1*5 
1950 A 1/322 

1927C21 / 3 

1927C2 1/ 10 
1939A2 3/116 

191*G 12/1*5 



1920G18/ IB 



CONTINUE! 10 RESISTANCES 



CONT INUAI 10 



♦. 



repetition 



inhibit iun s « symptoms ano anxiety, repetition is the the resistances to psychoanalysis. 

CONSEQUENCE OF REPRESSION. 1926020/150 

LETTER 72. {RESISTANCES REFLECT CHILOhOOO.). 

REPETITIONS 



BEYUNO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. KtVIEU OF THE PLEASURE 
PRINCIPLE. TRAUMATIC NEUROSIS ANO CH1L0REN S PLAY ARE 
REPETITIONS. 



RESPONSIBILITY 

SOME AOOUIONAL NOTES ON DREAM INTERPRETATION AS A 
1 920018/ 7 WHOLE. MORAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE CONTENT OF OREAMS. 



REPRESENT 



RESTRICTING 



ATTEMPT TO REPRESENT NORMAL PSI PROCESSES 1950A 1/360 CIVILISATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. SECURITY AT THE COST 

OF RESTRICTING SEXUALITY ANO AGGRESSION. 

REPRESENT A6IL IT Y 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE OREAM-WORK. 
CONSIDERATIONS OF REPRESENT ABILITY. 

REPRESENTATION 



RESTRICTIONS 

1900A 5/339 INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. INHIBITIONS REFLECT 
RESTRICTIONS OF EGO FUNCTIONS. 



RETROSPECTIVE 

THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. THE MEANS 

OF REPRESENTATION IN OREAMS. I900A 4/310 LETTER 101. {RETROSPECTIVE FANTASIES.). 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS* THE OREAM-WORK. 
REPRESENTATION BY SYMBOLS IN ORbAMS - SOME FURTHER 
TYPICAL OREAMS. 



REVIEW 

1900A 5/350 REVIEW OF AUGUST FOREL'S HYPNOTISM. 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS., analytic 

PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. REPRESENTATION BY 

OPPOSITE) CONCEPTUAL JOKES. 1905C 

REPRESSED 



REVIEW OF WILHELM NEUTRA'S LETTERS TG NEUROTIC WOMEN. 

8/ 70 BEYONO THF PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. REVIEW OF THE PLEASURE 
PRINCIPLE. TRAUMATIC NEUROSIS ANO CHILOREN S PLAY ARE 
REPETITIONS. 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISMS THREE ESSAYS. MOSES* HIS PEOPLE 

ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE RETURN OF THE RtPRESSEU. 1939A23/124 



INTRODUCTION TO THE SPECIAL PSYCHOPATHOLOGY NUMBER OF 
THE MEOICAL REVIEW OF REVIEWS. 



REPRESSION 



REVISION 



THE INTERPRETATION UF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY UF THE 
DREAM PROCESSES. THE PRIMARY ANO SECCNOARY PROCESSES 
REPRESSION* 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. SECONO LECTURE. 
REPRESSION ANO SYMPTOM FORMATION. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. REPRESSION. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. SECONOARY 
REVISION. 

1900A 5/5BB 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. REVISION OF JHE THEORY 
OF INSTINCTS. 

1910A1 1/ 21 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. REVISION 
1915014/141 OF THE THEORY OF OREAMS. 



PAPERS ON METAPSYCHULOGY. REPRESSION. 



1915014/146 RIOOLES 



PARERS ON METAPSYCHULOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. TOPOGRAPHY 
ANO OYNAMICS OF REPRESSIUN. 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENOIX: 
1915E14/1B0 FR ANT BRENT ANO 1 S RIOOLES. 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY RITES 

OF THE NEUROSES. RESISTANCE ANO REPRESSION. 1916X16/2B6 

PREFACE TO BOURKE'S SCATALOGIC RITES OF ALL NATIONS. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY PROOUCES 

REPRESSION. 1926020/101 RITUAL 



INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. OEFENSES OTHER THAN 
REPRESSION. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTUMS ANO ANXIETY. REPETITION IS THE 
CONSEQUENCE OF REPRESSION. 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. REPRESSION ANO 
OEFENCE. 

ORAFT M. {REPRESSION IN HYSTERIA.). 

REPRODUCES 

INHIBITIONS* SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY REPRODUCES 
FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 

REPROOUCT IVE 

I NT ROOUCT.I ON or THE EGO PRIMARY AND SECONOARY PROCESS 
IN PSD COGNITION ANO REPRODUCTIVE THOUGHT) REMEMBERING 
ANO JUOGING) THOUGHT ANO REALITY. 



1926020/111 

1926020/150 

1926020/173 
1950A 1/250 

1926020/132 
1950A 1/322 



PREFACE TO RE IK S RITUAL: PSYCHOANALYTIC STUOIES. 

ROLL ANO 

TO ROMAIN ROLLANO. 

ROMANCES 

FAMILY ROMANCES. 

RULERS 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TABOO UPON RULERS. 

SACRIFICIAL 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHILOHOOO. 
ANIMAL PHOBIAS. SACRIFICIAL FEASTS. 

SAMPLE 



REQUIRES INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. DREAMS. SOME 

ANALYSES OF SAMPLE OREAMS. 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. THE ANALYST S TASK REQUIRES 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. 1937023/255 SANOER'S 



RESEARCHES 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL RESEARCHES OF CHILOWJOO. 



THE UNCANNY. APPENOIX: EXTRACT FROM 0 AN I EL SANOER'S 
WORTERBUCH OER OI-UTSCHEN SPRACHE. 

ISO 50 7/194 SATISFACTION 



RESERVOIR 

THE EGO ANO THE 10 • THE OESCRIPTIVE ANO THE OYNAMlC 

UNCONSCIOUS. THE GREAT RESERVOIR OF LIBIOO. 1923B19/ 60 

RESISTANCE 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FIFTH LECTURE. 

TRANSFERENCE ANO RESISTANCE. 1910A11/ 49 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. RESISTANCE ANO REPRESSION. 1916X16/2B6 



THE FUNCTIONING OF THE APPARATUS { THE PATHS OF 
CONDUCTION! THE EXPERIENCE OF SATISFACTION) THE 
EXPERIENCE OF PAIN) AFFECTS ANO WISHFUL STAJES. 

SAUSSURE'S 

PREFACE TO RAYMONO OE SAUSSURE'S THE PSYCHOANALYTIC 
METHOO. 

SCATALOGIC 

PREFACE TO BOURKE'S SCATALOGIC RITES OF ALL NATIONS. 



ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. BISEXUALITY IS SCENE 

THE STRONGEST RESISTANCE 10 ANALYSIS. 1937C23/250 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE OREAM 

RESISTANCES ANO THE PRIMAL SCENE. IWOLFMAN). 



THE RESISTANCES TO PSYCHOANALYSIS. APPENOIX: EXTRACT 
FROM SCHOPENHAUER'S THE WORLO AS WILL ANO IDEA. 



SCHOOLBOY 



19/223 



8-37 




I925E1 9/21 3 
1950A 1/266 

1925119/13 1 

I930A21/108 

1926020/ B7 

1950A 1/276 

1BB9A 1/ B9 
1910MU/23B 

1920G1B/ 7 

1930C2 1/254 

1900A 5/4BB 
1920G1B/ 34- 
1933A22/ 7 

1905C B/237 
19 13K 1 2/333 
I919G17/257 
1976 A20/279 
1909C 9/235 

1912X13/ 41 

1912X13/126 

1916X1S/1B4 

1919H17/253 

1950A 1/312 

1922E19/2B3 
1913K 12/333 

1918B17/ 29 



some reflections on schoolboy psychology 



1914F 13/241 






SCHOPENHAUER'S 

THfc RESISTANCES TO PSYCHOANALYSIS. APPENOIX: EXTRACT 
FROM SCHOPENHAUER'S THE WORLO AS HILL ANO IOEA. 

SCHREBER 

PSYCHOANALYTIC NOTES ON AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL ACCOUNT OF 
A CASE OF PARANOIA I OEHENT I A PARANOIOES). SCHREBER. 

SCHR IF TEN 

PROSPECTUS FOR SCHR IF TEN ZUR ANGEHANOTEN SEELENKUNOE. 
SCIENCE 

THfc FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. IS RATIONALITY POSSIBLE. 
RELATION OF RELIGION 10 SCIENCE. 

SCIENCES 

THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 

TH6 CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST OF THE 
NUN-PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES. THE PHILOLOGICAL. 
PHILOSOPHICAL ANO BIOLOGICAL INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 

THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST OF THE 
NON-PSYCHOLOG ICAL SCIENCES. THE INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS FROM A DEVELOPMENTAL POINT OF VIEH. 

SCIENTIFIC 

ABSTRACTS OF THE SCIENTIFIC WRITINGS OF OR. SIGM. FREUO 
1 B77- 1 897 • 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF UREAMS. Thfc RELATION OF 
OREAMS TO WAKING LIFE. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
UfcALING WITH TKE PROBLEMS OF ORfcAMS. THE MATERIAL OF 
URfcAMS - MEMORY IN OREAMS. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE STIMULI ANO 
SOURCES OF OREAMS, 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. WHY OREAMS ARE 
FORGOTTEN AFTER WAKING. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE DISTINGUISHING 
PSYCHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OREAMS. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE MORAL SENSE IN 
OREAMS. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
IN OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THEORIES OF 
OREAMING ANU ITS FUNCTION. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE RELATIONS 
BETWEEN OREAMS ANO MENTAL OISEASES. 

THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 

THE PSYCHOLOGICAL INTEREST OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 

THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST OF THE 
NON-PSYCHOLOG I CAL SCIENCES. THE PHILOLOGICAL t 
PHILOSOPHICAL ANO BIOLOGICAL INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

THE CLAIMS UF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC INTEREST. 

THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST OF THE 
NON-PSYCHOLOG ICAL SCIENCES. THE INTEREST OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS FRCM A DEVELOPMENTAL POINT OF VIEW. 

PROJECT FOR A SCIENTIFIC PSYCHOLOGY! EDITOR'S 
I NTRUOUCT ION ANO KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS IN THE PROJECT. 

SCREEN 

SCREEN MEMORIES. 

THfc PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. ChILOHOOO 
MEMORIES ANO SCREEN MEMORIES. 

SECONOARY 

THE INIERPREIATION UF OREAMS, THE OREAM-WORK. SECONOARY 
REVISION. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
ORE AM PROCESSES. THE PRIMARY ANO SECCNOARY PROCESSES - 
REPRESSION • 

INTRODUCTION OF THE EGO PRIMARY ANO SECONOARY PROCESS 
IN PSH COGNITION AND REPRODUCTIVE THOUGHT I REMEMBERING 
ANO JUOGINGI THOUGHT ANO REALITY, 

SECTION 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. THEORETICAL 
SECTIUN. SOME GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF 0B6ESSI0NAL 
STRUCTURES. 



19/223 



191 IC 1 2/ 12 



1907E 9/24B 



1927C2 1 / 46 



1913J13/176 

1913J13/1B2 

1B97B 3/225 

1900A 4/ 1 

1900A 4/ II 

1900A 4/ 22 

1900A 4/ 43 

1900A 4/ 4B 

1900A 4/ 63 

1900A 4/ 75 

1900A 4/ 00 
1913J13/16S 

1913 J 13/ 176 

1913J 13/ 182 
1950A 1/2B3 

1899A 3/301 
190 IB 6/ 43 

1900A S/4BB 
1900A S/SBB 
1950A 1/322 

1909010/221 



SECURITY 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. SECURITY AT THE COS! 
OF RESTRICTING SEXUALITY ANO AGGRESSION. 

SE0UCT10N 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE 
SEOUCTION ANO ITS iMMEOIATE CONSEQUENCES. IWOLFMANl. 

SEELENKUNOE 

PROSPECTUS FOR SCHR IFTEN ZUR ANGEWANOTEN SEELENKUNOE. 
SELF-ANALYSIS 

LETTER 70. IFREUO S EARLY MEMORIES FROM 
SELF-ANALYSIS.) . 

SEPARATION 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY 4S A SIGNAL 
OF OANGEROUS SEPARATION. 

SEQUENCES 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SEQUENCES OF VOWELS. 

SETS 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE, THE FORGETTING OF 
NAMES ANO SETS OF WOfcOS. 

SETTING 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. SETTING A TIME 
LIMIT FOR TERMINATION. FACTORS WHICH MAY MAKE ANALYSIS 
INTERMINABLE. 

SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY 

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS. 

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS. THE STORY 
OF CHRISTOPH HAIZMANN THE PAINTER. 

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY DEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS. THE 
MOTIVE FOR THE PACT WITH THE OEVIL. 

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS. THE OEVIL 
AS FATHER-SUBSTITUTE. 

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS, THE TWO 
BONOS, 

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OEMONOLOGICAL NEUROSIS. THE 
FURTHER COURSE OF THE NEUROSIS. 

SEXES 

SOME PSYCHICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THfc ANATOMICAL 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE SEXES. 

SOME PSYCHICAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE ANATOMICAL 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE SEXES. 

SEXUAL 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE IHEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. 0EVIA7I0NS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL 
OBJECT. INVERSION. SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 
ANIMALS -AS SEXUAL OBJECTS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL AIM. 
ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 
AIMS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. THE PERVERSIONS IN GENERAL. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
. ABERRATIONS. THE SEXUAL INSTINCT IN NEUROTICS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. COMPONENT INSTINCTS ANO EROTOGENIC ZONfcS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. REASONS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 
PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE PSYCHCNEUROSE S. INTIMATION Cr 
THE INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY, INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY! THE PERIOO OF SEXUAL LATENCY IN CHILOHOOO 
ANO ITS INTERRUPTIONS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL AIM OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. MASTURBATORY SEXUAL MANIFESTATIONS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXU4LI TY. THE SEXUAL RESEARCHES OF CHlLOFOOO. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE PHASES OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL 
ORGANIZATION. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 

T R ANSFURMAT IONS OF PUBERTY. THE PROBLEM OF SEXUAL 

EXCITATION. 



S3B 



227 



I930A2 1/ IOB 

1910017/ 19 
1907E 9/24B 

1950A 1/261 

1926020/124 

1911012/341 

1901B 6/ 15 

1937C23/2 1 6 

1923019/ 69 
1923019/ 73 
1923019/ 79 
1923019/ B3 
1923CI9/ 93 
1923019/100 

1925J19/243 
1925J 19/248 

19050 7/136 

19050 7/149 
19050 7/160 
19050 7/163 
19050 7/167 

19050 7/170 

19050 7/173 
19050 7/1B3 
19050 7/ IB 5 
19050 7/194 

19050 7/197 

19050 7/212 



SEXUAL 



CONT INUAI I Cl SEXUALITY 



CUNTINUAIIC 



THE SEXUAL ENLIGHTENMENT OF CHILOAEN. 

ON THE SEXUAL THEORIES OF CHILOREN. 

CIVIL I ZEO SEXUAL MORALITY ANO HOOEKN NERVOUS ILLNESS. 

I EONAROO-OA-VINCI ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILOK'OO. SEXUAL 
INTERPRETATION OF LEONARDO'S CHlLOHUOO MEMORY. 

INTROOUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
UF THE NEUROSES. THE SEXUAL LIFE OF HUMAN 8EINGS. 

INTRUOUCTURV LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE UEVELOPflENT OF THE LIBIDO ANU THE 
SEXUAL ORGANIZATIONS. 

A CHILO IS BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUOV OF 
THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 

A CHILO IS BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION TG THE STUOV OF 
THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL PERVFRSIONS. 

A CHILO IS BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUOY OF 
THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 

A CHILO IS BEING BEATEN: A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF 
THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL PERVERSIONS. 

FEMALE SEXUALITY. GIRL'S PRE-OEOIPAL SEXUAL AIMS TOHARO 
MOTHER. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE OEVELOPHENT OF THE SEXUAL FUNCTION. 

LETTER 18. I EFFECT OF SEXUAL NOXAE.). 

SEXUALITY 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. APPENOIX: LIST 
OF WRITINGS BY FREUD OEALING PREOOMI NANTL V OR LARGELY 
WITH SEXUALITY. 

SEXUALITY IN THE AETIOLOGY Cl : THE NEUROSES. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. OEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL 
OBJECT. INVERSION. SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 
ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. OEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL AIM. 
ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 
AIMS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. THE PERVERSIONS IN GENERAL. 

THREE ESSAYS UN THE THEORY UF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. THE SEXUAL INSTINCT IN NEUROTICS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. COMPONENT INSTINCTS ANO EROTOGENIC ZONES. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. REASONS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 
PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE PSYCHONEUROSES. INTIMATION OF 
THE INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY: THE PER 1 00 OF SEXUAL LATENCY IN CHILCHOOO 
ANO ITS INTERRUPTIONS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE MANIFESTATIONS OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL AIM OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. MASTURBATORV SEXUAL MANIFESTATIONS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL RESEARCHES OF LHILOHOOO. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE PHASES OF OEVELOPHENT OF THE SEXUAL 
ORGANIZATION. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SOURCES OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE PRIMACY OF THE GENITAL 
20NES ANO THE FORE-PLEASURE • 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE PROBLEM OF SEXUAL 
EXCITATION. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE LIBIOO THEORY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE OIFFERENTI ATION BETWEEN 
MEN ANO WOMEN. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE FINOING OF AN OBJECT. 



I907C 9/129 
I90BC 9/205 
1908U 9/177 

1910C1 1/ 93 

1916X16/303 

1916X16/320 

1919E 17/175 

1919E 17/179 

19I9EI7/1B6 

1919E17/I95 

193 1 B2 1/235 

1990A23/152 
1950 A I/IBB 

7/299 
1B9BA 3/261 
19050 7/125 

19050 7/136 

i:350 7/199 
19050 7/160 
19050 7/163 
19050 7/167 

19050 7/170 



19050 

19051) 

19050 

19050 

19050 

19050 

19050 



7/173 

7/179 

7/1B3 

7/1B5 

7/199 

7/197 

7/200 



19050 7/207 



19050 

19050 



7/212 

7/217 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. SUMMARY. 


19050 7/231 


MY VIEWS UN ThE PART playeo by sexuality in the 
AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSES. 


1906A 7/271 


NOTES UPON A CASE OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 

FROM THE CASE HISTC..V: THE BEGINNING OF THE TREATMENT. 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY. IRAT-MAN). 


19090 10/ 158 


FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FOURTH LECTURE. 
INFANTILE SEXUALITY ANO NEUROSIS. 


1 9 1 OA 1 1 / 9C 


THE INFANTILE GENITAL ORGANIZATION: AN INTERPOLATION 

into the theory of sexuality. 


1923E19/I91 


CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. SECURITY AT THE COST 
OF RESTRICTING SEXUALITY ANO AGGRESSION. 


193CA21/10B 


FEMALE SEXUALITY. FEMALE OEOIPUS COMPLEX OIFFERS FROM 
MALE. 


1931 B2 1/223 


FEMALE SEXUALITY. GIRL'S PRE-OEOIPAL MOTIVES FOR 
TURNING AWAY FROM MOTHER. 


193 IB 21/227 


FEMALE SEXUALITY. GIRL'S PRE-OEOIPAL SEXUAL AIMS TOWARO 
MOTHER. 


1931B21/235 


FEMALE SEXUALITY. CRITIQUE OF ANALYTIC LITERATURE ON 
FEMALE SEXUALITY. 


1931B21/290 



19050 7/219 
19050 



SIGNAL 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY IS A SIGNAL 
OF OANGEROUS SEPARATION. 

SIGNIFICANCE 

the significance of sequences of vowels. 

SOME AODIT IONAL NOTES ON OREAM INTERPRETATION AS A 
WHOLE. THE OCCULT SIGNIFICANCE OF UREAMS. 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. THE PSYCHOLOGICAL 
SIGNIFICANCE OF RELIGIOUS IOEAS. RELIGIOUS IOEAS ARE 
ILLUSIONS. 

SKEPTICAL 

jokes and their relation to the unconscious, a analytic 

PART. THE PURPOSE OF JOKES. HOSTILE. CYNICAL ANO 
SKEPTICAL JOKES. 

sketches 

SKETCHES FOR THE PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION OF IB93. ON 
THE THEORY OF HYSTERICAL ATTACKS. 

SLEEP 

LETTER 73. ICHILOREN S SPEECH OURING SLEEP.). 

PRIMARY PROCESSES - SLEEP ANO OREAMSi THE ANALYSIS OF 
OREAMSJ DREAM CONSCIOUSNESS; FREUO S USE CF 1HE CONCEPT 
OF REGRESSION. 

SLIPS 

THE PSVCHQPAThJLOGV OF EVER YO AY LIFE. SLIPS OF THE 
TONGUE. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY LIFE. MlSRSAOINGS ANO 
SLIPS OF THE PEN. MISREAO INGS • 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF E VERYOAY LIFE. Ml SREAOINGS ANO 
SLIPS OF THE PEN. SLIPS OF THE PEN. 

SMILES 

LEONAROO-DA-VINCI ANO A MEMORY OF HIS CHILOHOOD. THE 
BLISSFUL SMILES IN LEONARDO'S PAINTINGS. 

SMUT 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE PURPOSES OF JOKES. INNOCENT JOKESi SMUT ANO 
THE PURPOSE OF JOKES. 

SOC I AL 

jukes and their relation to the unconscious, synthetic 

PART. THE MOTIVES OF JOKES - JOKES AS A SOCIAL 
PROCESS. 

SOCIETY 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHlLOHOOO. 
OEOIPUS COMPLEX ANO SOCIETY. 

AUORESS TO THE SOCIETY OF B'NAI-B'RITH . 

SOLUTION 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FRUM THE CASE HISTORY. THE FATHER COMPLEX ANO THE 
SOLUTION OF THE RAT, IDEA. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. FRESH 
MATERIAL FROM THE PRIMAL PERI 00 - SOLUTION. IWOLFMAN). 



1926020/129 

1911012/391 
19251. 9/135 

1927C21/ 25 

1905C B/102 

199 1A 1/197 
1950A 1/267 
I950A 1/335 

1901B 6/ 53 
190 IB 6/106 
190 1 B 6/116 

191 OC 11/107 
I905C 8/ 91 

1905C 8/190 

1912X13/I55 
199 1E20/2 i 1 

1909010/200 
191BB17/ 89 



r' 



7/222 

S-39 




228 



t. 



SOMATIC 



STRATIFICATION 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE HATCRIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAHS. THE SOMATIC SOURCES OF OREAHS. 

SOURCE 



1900A 4/221 



LETTER 92. I STRATIFICATION UF MEMORY TRACES.). 
STRENGTH 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 

OF OREAHS. INFANTILE MATERIAL AS A SOURCE OF OREAHS. I900A 4/lb9 

SPECIES 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 

PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. 1905C 0/. fil 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS* THEORETIC 

PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. PSYCHICAL 

LdCmT I ON DISTINGUISHES JOKES FROM THE COMIC. I905C 8/199 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS* THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. DIFFERENCES 
BETWEEN JOKES ANO COMIC. 1905C 6/208 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 

PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES UF THE COMIC. COMIC THINGS 

ARE NOT PRUPER IN JOKES; RELATION OF HUMOUR TO JUKES. 1905C 8/221 



SPECIFIC 



ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. THE STRENGTH OF 
THE INSTINCTS VIS-A-VIS THE OTHER PSYCHICAL AGENCIES. 

STRONGEST 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. BISEXUALITY IS 
THE STRONGEST RESISTANCE TO ANALYSIS. 

STRUCTURE 

LETTER 61. (STRUCTURE OF HYSTERIA.). 

STRUCTURES 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. THEORETICAL 
SECTION. SOME GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OBSESSIONAL 
STRUCTURES. 

SUBSTI TUTE 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. RELIGION IS A SUBSTITUTE FOR 
RATIONAL ITY. 



FURTHER REMARKS ON THE NEUROPSYCHOSES OF CUENCE. THE 
SPECIFIC AETIOLOGY OF HYSTERIA. 

SPECIMEN 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE METHOO OF 
INTERPRETING OREAHS; AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN ORE AM. 



SUBSTITUTION 

18968 3/162 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. MAN COPES WITH 
UNHAPPINESS THROUGH OIVERSION. SUBSTITUTION ANO 
IN TOXI CAT ION. 

1900A 4/ 96 SUBSTITUTIVE 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE METHOO OF 
INTERPRETING OREAHS; AN ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN OREAH 
(PREAMBLE ANO OREAM). 1900A 

SPECULATIONS 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIOUE OF JOKES. CONDENSATIONS ANO 
4/106 SUBSTITUTIVE FORMATIONS IN UREAHS. 

SUBTLETIES 



BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. SPECULATIONS ON THE 
OEATH INSTINCT. 

SPEECH 

LETTER 73. (CHILOREN S SPEECH DURING SLEEP.). 

SPEECHES 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE OCbAH-WORK. SOME 
EXAMPLES. CALCULATIONS AND SPEECHES (N OREAHS. 

SPHERE 

ON THE UNIVERSAL TENOENCY TO DEBASEMENT IN THE SPHERE 
OF LOVE. (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 



1920010/ 24 
1950A 1/267 



1900A S/405 



1912011/177 



THE SUBTLETIES IF A FAULTY ACTION. 

SUGGESTION 

PARERS ON HYPNOTISM ANO SUGGESTION. 

PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF BERNHE I M * S SUGGESTION. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY ANO THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. 
SUGGESTION ANO LIBIOO. 

SUICIOE 

CONTRIBUTIONS TO A OISCUSSIUN ON SUICIOE. 

SUPEREGO 



SPLITTING 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. UNCONSCIOUS IOEAS ANO IOEAS 
INADMISSIBLE TO CONSCIOUSNESS - SPLITTING OF THE MINO. 

SPLITTING OF THE EGO IN THE PROCESS OF OEFENCE. 

STAGE 



THE EGO ANO THE 10 . THE EGO ANO THE SUPEREGO 
(EGO-IOEAL) . 

10950 2/222 CIVILIZATION ANO ITS OISCONTENTS. DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
„ , SUPEREGO ANO ITS SEVERITY. 

1940E2 3/271 

SUPERSTITION 



PSYCHOPATHIC CHARACTERS UN THE STAGE. 
STATE 



1942A 7/305 



THE PSYCHOPAT HO LCGY OF EVERYDAY LIFE. OETERMINISH, 
BELIEF IN CHANCE AND SUPERSTITION - SOME POINTS OF 
VIEW. 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE. 1916X16/370 



THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAY LIFE. OET ERMINISH, 
BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITIUN - SOME POINTS OF 
VIEW. 



STEINER'S 

PREFACE TO MAXIM STEINER'S THE PSYCHICAL CISOROERS OF 
MALE POTENCY. 

STEKEL'S 

PREFACE TU WILHELM STEKEL'S NERVOUS ANXIETY STATES ANO 
THEIR treatment. 



THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY 3F EVERYOAY LIFE. OETERMINI SHf 
BELIEF IN CHANCE ANO SUPERSTITION - SUME POINTS OF 
VIEW. 

I913E12/345 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. SOME 
PSYCHOLOGICAL PECULIARITIES OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROTICS: 
THEIR ATTITUOE TOWAROS REALITY, SUPERSTITION ANO OEATH. 

19O0F 9/250 SUPPLEMENTARY 



STEPS 

ON THE GROUNOS FUR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FRUM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
FIRST STEPS TOWAROS A THEDRY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

STEROA'S 



INHIBITIONS, SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY. SUPPLEMENTARY 
REMARKS ON ANXIETY. 

SUPPRESSED 

1095B 3/106 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM; THREE ESSAYS. IF HOSES WAS AN 
EGYPTIAN. ONE HUNUREO YEARS OF HISTORY SUPPRESSED. 



PREFACE TO RICHARC STERBA'S DICTIONARY UF 

PSYCHOANALYSIS. 1936822/253 

STIMULI 

THE INTERPRETATION OF UREAHS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 

OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAHS. THE STIMULI ANO 

SOURCES OF OREAHS. I900A 4/ 22 

STORY 

A SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY OEMONOLOG ICAL NEUROSIS. THE STORY 
OF CHRISTOPH HAIZMANN THE PAINTER. 1923019/ 73 

STRACHEY 

NOTE. (BY STRACHEY). 1/219 



SURVEY 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. GENERAL 
SURVEY UF THE PATIENT'S ENVIRONMENT ANO OF THE HISTORY 
OF THE CASE. (WOLF MAN I • 

SYMBOL 

A CONNECTION BETWEEN A SYMBOL ANO A SYMPTOM. 

SYMBOL! SM 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHUANALYSI S* OREAHS. 
SYMBOLISM IN OREAHS. 

LETTER 57. (WITCHES ANO SYMBOLISM.). 



S-40 




1950A 1/234 

I937C23/224 

I937C23/250 
1950A 1/247 

1909010/221 
I927C2 1/ 40 

1930A2 1/ 74 

1905C 6/ 29 

1935822/23 3 

1/ 61 
I660X 1/ 73 

1921C1B/ BB 
1910G1 1/23 1 

1923819/ 26 
1930A21/123 

I 90 IB 6/239 
19016 b/254 
19016 b/269 
1909DlG/22v 

1926020/164 

1939A23/ 41 

1916BI7/ 13 
1916CI4/339 

1916X15/149 
I950A 1/243 



229 



SYMBOLS 



SYNOPSIS 



CONTINUATIC 



THE I NTERPRETATICN OF ORLAMS. THE OREAM-WGRK. 

Rt PRESENTATION BY SYMBOLS IN OREAMS - SOME FURTHER 
TYPICAL OREAMS. 


1900A S/350 


I N TROOUC IORV LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. INDEX OF 
SYMBOLS. 


1916X16/9B1 


SYMPTOM 




FIVE LfcCTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. SECONO LECTURE. 
REPRESSION ANO SYHPTUM FORMATION. 


1910A1 1/ 21 


A CONNECUON BETWEEN A SYMBOL ANO A SYMPTOM. 


191 6C 1 9/339 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. RELATICN BETWEEN 
SYMPTOM FORMATION ANO ANXIETY. 


1926020/199 


SYMP I0MAT1C 




THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF E VERYOAY LIFE. SYMPTOMATIC ANO 
CHANCE ACTIONS. 


1901B 6/191 


SYMPTOMATOLOGY 




ON THE GROUNDS FUR OETACH IN G A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE CLINICAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 


189SB 3/ 90 


SYMPTOMS 




FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FIRST LECTURE. 
SYMPTOMS HAVE PSYCHOLOGICAL MEANING. 


191 0A1 1 / 9 


I NTROOUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSIS. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS. 


1916X16/257 


INTROOUCIORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE PATHS TO THE FORMAT ICN OF 
SYMPTOMS. 


1916X16/3SB 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY, 


1926020/ 77 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. INHIBITIONS REFLECT 
RESTRICTIONS OF EGO FUNCTIONS. 


1926020/ B7 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. SYMPTOMS REFLECT 
INTEMSYSTEMIC CONFLICTS. 


1926020/ 91 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. RELATION OF EGO TO 
THE 10 ANO TO SYMPTOMS. 


1926020/ 97 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY PROOUCES 
REPRESSION. 


1926020/101 


inhibitions. Symptoms ano anxiety, oefenses other than 

REPRESSION. 


1926020/111 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. UNOOING ANO 
ISOLATION. 


1926020/119 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOHS ANO ANXIETY, ANXIETY ISA SIGNAL 
OF OANGEROUS SEPARATION. 


1926020/129 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY REPRODUCES 
FEELINGS OF HELPLESSNESS. 


1926020/ 132 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS AND ANXIETY. RELATION BETWEEN 
SYMPTOM FORMATION ANO ANXIETY, 


1926020/199 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY, REPETITION IS THE 
CONSEQUENCE OF REPRESSION. 


1926020/1S0 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. MOOIFICAJION OF 
EARLIER VIEWS. 


1926020/157 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. SUPPLEMENTARY 
REMARKS ON ANXIETY, 


1926020/169 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. ANXIETY. PAIN ANO 
MOURNING. 


1926020/169 


INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. REPRESSION ANO 
DEFENCE. 


1926020/173 


ORAFT N. 1 IMPULSES. FANTASIES ANO SYMPTOMS.). 


1950A 1/259 


SYNDROME 




ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACH IN G A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS, 

THE TERM ANGST ANO ITS ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 


3/116 


ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACH IN G A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE CLINICAL SYMPTOMATOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 


18958 3/ 90 


ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNDROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNDER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
INCIOENCE ANO AETIOLOGY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 


1B95B 3/ 99 


ON THE GROUNOS FUR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
FIRST STEPS TOMAROS A THEORY OF ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 


1B958 3/106 


ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 
RELATION TO OTHER NEUROSES. 


1B958 3/112 



SYNOPSIS 



JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. 
SYNTHETIC 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MECHANISM OF PLEASURE ANO THE PSYCHOGENESIS 
OF JOKES. 

JUKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. T Hfc MECHANISM OF PLEASURE ANO THE PSKCHOGENESI S 
OF JOKES. THE PURPUSE ANO FUNCTIONS OF JOKES. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MOTIVES OF JUKES - JOKES AS A SOCIAL 
PROCESS. 

SYSTEMS 

PAPERS UN METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. 
COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THE TWO SYSTEMS. 

TABUO 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE HORROR OF INCEST. 
TOTEM ANO TABOO. 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. 



TABOO ANU EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE (1) • 



10TEM ANO TABOO. TABOC AND EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. 
PARALLEL BETWEEN TABOO ANO OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. T IBOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TREATMENT OF ENEMIES. 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TABOO UPON RULERS. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TABOO UPON THE OEAO. TABOO ANO CONSCIENCE. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ANir.lSM. MAGIC ANO THE OMNIPOTENCE OF 
THOUGHTS. ANIMISM. MAGIC. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ANIHISIM. MAGIC. OMNIPOTENCE OF 
THOUGHTS. OMNIPOTENCE OF THOUGHTS. TOTEMISM IS A 
SYSTEM. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHILOHOOO. 
THE NATUKb OF TOTEMISM. 



TABOO ANO TOTEM. THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN OHILDREN. 
THE ORIGIN OF TOTEM I SMI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY ANO ITS 
RELATION TO TOTEMISM. 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHILOHOOO. 
ANIMAL PHOBIAS. SACRIFICIAL FEASTS. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHILOHOOO. 
RELATION OF TOTEM MEALS TO FATHER ANO GOO. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHILOHOOO. 
OEOIPUS COMPLEX ANO SOCIETY. 

THE TABOO OF VIRGINITY. (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE 
PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 

TALE 



ORAFT K. THE NEUROSES OF OEFENCE. IA CHRISTMAS FAIRY 
TALE. I • 

TALES 

THE OCCURRENCE IN OREAMS OF MATERIAL FROM FAIRY TALES. 



TASK 

CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. THE ANALYS1 $ TASK REQUIRES 
CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE PRACTICAL TASK. THE 
TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE PRACTICAL TASK. AN 
EXAMPLE OF PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 

TAUSK 



VICTOR TAUSK. 

TEACHING 

ON THE TEACHING OF PSYCHOANALYSIS IN UNIVERSITIES. 
TECHNIQUE 

PARERS ON TECHNIQUE. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. JOKES ARE SIMILAR TO 
OREAMS. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. CONOENSATI ON& ANO 
SUBSTITUTIVE FORMATIONS IN DREAMS. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. SUMMARY ANO PUNS. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 



$41 



J£30 



I907A 9/ 7 

1 90 SC 8/117 
190 SC B/12B 
1905C B/190 

191SL19/190 

1912X13/ 1 

1912X13/ IX 
1912X13/ IB 

1912X13/ 26 

1912X13/ 35 

1912X13/ 91 

1912X13/ SI 

1912X13/ 75 

1912X13/ BS 
1912X13/ 100 

191 2X13/ 10B 
1912X13/126 
1912X13/190 
191 2X13/ISS 
191 8A1 1/191 

19S0A 1/220 
1913012/279 

1937023/2SS 
199 0A23/17 2 
1990A23/1B3 

1919F 17/273 

19 19 J 17/169 

12/ BS 

190SC B/ 16 

1905C B/ 29 
1905C B/ 95 



OELUS IONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. SYNOPSIS OF 



TECHNIQUE 

PARI. THE TECHNIQUE UF JOKES. PUNS* ABSUROITY AS A 
JOKE TECHNIQUE. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. RELATION OF JOKES TO THE 
COMIC: UNIFICATION AS A JOKE TECHNIQUE. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE CF JOKES. REPRESENTATION BY 
OPPOSITE! CONCEPTUAL JOKES. 

JUKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE of JOKES. ANALOGY AS A JOKE 
TECHNIQUE. 

PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. THE HANOLING OF 
OKEAM-INTERPKETATION IN PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. THE OYNAMICS OF TRANSFERENCE. 



CONTINUATIC THEORETIC 



1905C a/ *7 
190 SC 0/ 60 
1905C 0/ 70 

I905C a/ 81 

K'UE12/ 89 
1912B12/ 97 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. THE RELATION OF JOKES TO OREAMS ANO TO THE 
UNCONSCIOUS. 

JOKES ANO THE IK RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PARI. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. PSYCHICAL 
LOCATION DISTINGUISHES JOKES FROM THE COMIC. 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS 
PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. 
BETWEEN JOKES ANO COMIC. 



. THEORETIC 
DIFFERENCES 



JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS 
PARI. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. 
ARE NOT PROPER IN JOKES: RELATION OF HUMOUR 



• THEORETIC 
COMIC THINGS 
TO JOKES. 



THEORETICAL 



PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. RECOMMENOAT IONS TO PHYSICIANS 
PKAC USING PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

PAPERS UN TECHNIQUE. ON BEGINNING THE TREATMENT. 
(FURTHER RECOMMENOAT IONS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF 
PSYCHOANALYSI SI . 



1912 E 12/109 



1913C12/121 



NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. THEORETICAL 
SECTION. SOME GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF OBSESSIONAL 
STRUCTURES. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YIELO. 
THE PSYCHICAL APRARATUS ANO THE EXTERNAL WORLO. 



PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. REMEMBERING# REPEATING ANO 
WORKING- THROUGH. (FURTHER R ECOMMENOAT I ONS ON THE 
TECHNIQUE OF P SYCHOANALVSI SI . 



AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YIELO. 
I 91 9G 1 2/195 THE INTERNAL WOKLO. 



PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. OBSERVATIONS ON TRANSFERENCE LOVE. 
(FURTHER RECOMMENOATIONS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS! . 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. THE 
PREMISSES ANO TECHNIQUE OF INTERPRETATION. 

A NUTE ON THE PREHISTORY OF THE TECHNIQUE OF ANALYSIS. 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 



I915A12/1S7 

1916X15/100 
1920B1 8/263 
1925020/ *0 



THEORIES 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
IN OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THEORIES OF 
DREAMING ANO ITS FUNCTION. 

ON THE SEXUAL THEORIES OF CHILOREN. 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. BASIC THEORIES OF 

psychoanalysis. 



AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHUANALYSI S. THE PRACTICAL TASK. THE 
TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. 



1990A23/172 



TELEPATHY 

OREAMS ANU TELEPATHY. 

OREAMS ANO TELEPATHY. 

OREAMS ANO TELEPATHY. 

PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO TELEPATHY. 

PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO TELEPATHY. 

TENOENCY 

ON THE UNIVERSAL TENOENCY TO OERASEMENT IN THE SPHERE 
OF LOVE. (CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF L0VE1. 

TERM 

ON THE GROUNDS FUR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNOROHE FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOEK THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE TERM ANGST ANO ITS ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 

TERMINABLE 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. 



1922A 1 8/196 
1922A18/200 
1922A18/208 
199 1018/175 
1991018/181 



1912011/177 



3/116 
193 7C23/209 



THEORY 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. APPENOIX: LIST 
OF WRITINGS BY FREUO OEALING PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY 
WITH SEXUALITY. 

ON THE GROUNOS FOR OETACHING A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE DESCRIPTION ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY* THE SEXUAL 

aberrations, deviations in respect of the sexual 

OBJECT. INVERSIUN. SEXUALLY IMMATURE PERSONS ANO 
ANIMALS AS SEXUAL OBJECTS. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. DEVIATIONS IN RESPECT OF THE SEXUAL AIM. 
ANATOMICAL EXTENSIONS. FIXATION OF PRELIMINARY SEXUAL 
AIMS. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE T HEURY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. THE PERVERSIONS IN GENERAL. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. THE SEXUAL INSTINCT IN NEUROTICS. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. COMPONENT INSTINCTS ANO EROTOGENIC ZONES. 



ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. SETTING A TIME 
LIMIT FOR TERMINATION. FACTORS WHICH MAY MAKE ANALYSIS 
INTERMINABLE. 


1937C23/2 16 


ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AM) INTERMINABLE. THE STRENGTH OF 
THE INSTINCTS VIS-A-VIS THE OTHER PSYCHICAL AGENCIES. 


I937C23/229 


ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. PROTECTING 
AGAINST FUTURE CONFLICTS. 


193 7C23/230 


ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERTABLE. ALTERATIONS OF 
THE EGU AFFECT PROGNOSIS. 


1937C23/239 


ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. CONSTITUTIONAL 
VARIABLES IN EGU. LIBIOO ANO FREE AGGRESSIVENESS. 


I937C23/290 


ANALYSIS TERMINABLE AND INTERMINABLE. FACTORS IN THE 
ANALYST AFFECT PKOGNUSIS. 


I937C23/297 


analysis terminable ano interminable, bisexuality is 

THE STRONGEST RESISTANCE TO ANALYSIS. 


1 93 7C23/250 



TERMINATION 



ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO 
LIMIT FOR TERMINATION. 
INTERMINABLE. 



INTERMINABLE. SETTING A TlHE 
FACTORS WHICH MAY MAKE ANALYSIS 



1937C23/216 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 
ABERRATIONS. REASONS FOR THE APPARENT PREPONDERANCE OF 
PERVERSE SEXUALITY IN THE PSYCHONEUROSES. INTIMATION OF 
THE INFANTILE CHARACTER OF SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY} THE PERIOD OF SEXUAL LATENCY IN CHILOHOOO 
ANO ITS INTERRUPTIONS. 

THREE E *SAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL AIM OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. MASTURBATORY SEXUAL MANIFESTATIONS. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALLY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL RESEARCHES OF CHILOHOOO' 

THREE* ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE PHASES OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL 
ORGANIZATION. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. INFANTILE 
SEXUALITY. THE SOURCES OF INFANTILE SEXUALITY. 



THEME 

THE THEME OF THE THREE CASKETS. 



THREE ESSAYS UN THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
1913F 12/269 TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE PRIMACY OF THE GENITAL 
ZONES ANO THE FORE-PLEASURE. 



IEOREM 

FIRST PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE QUANTITATIVE CONCEPTION} 
SECOND PRINCIPAL THEJREM} THE NEURONE THEORY: THE 
CONTACT-BARRIERS! THE BIOLOGICAL STANDPOI NT S THE 
PROBLEM OF QUANTITY: PAIN! THE PROBLEM OF QUALITY! 
CONSCIOUSNESS. 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE PROBLEM OF SEXUAL 
EXCITATION. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
1950A 1/295 TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE LIBIOO THEORY. 

S42 



231 



19Q5C 8/150 
1905C 8/181 

1905C 8/199 

1 905 C 8/208 

1905C 8/22 1 

1909010/221 

1990A23/195 

1990A23/205 

I 900A 9/75 
1908C 9/205 

1925020/ 29 

7/299 

1895B 3/106 
19050 7/125 

19050 7/136 

19050 7/199 
19050 7/160 
19050 7/163 
19050 7/167 

19050 7/170 

19050 7/173 
19050 7/179 
19050 7/183 
19050 7/185 
19050 7/199 

19050 7/197 
19050 7/200 

19050 7/207 

19050 7/212 
1905U 7/217 



THEORY 



CONUNUATIC THINGS 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 

TRANS FORMAT IONS OF PUBERTY. THE DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN 



MEN ANO WOMEN. 




19050 7/219 


THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TR ANSFORMATIDNS OF PUBERTY. THE FINOING OF AN OBJECT. 


19050 7/222 


THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. SUMMARY 


* 


19050 7/231 


A CASE OF PARANOIA RUNNING COUNTER TO THE 
PSYCHOANALYTIC THEORY OF THE DISEASE. 




1915F 14/261 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL 
OF THE NEUROSES: PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO PSYCHIATRY. 


THEORY 


1916X16/243 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL 
OF THE NEUROSIS. THE SENSE OF SYMPTOMS. 


THEORY 


1916X16/257 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES DN PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. FIXATION TO TRAUMAS - THE UNCONSCIOUS. 


1916X16/273 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL 
OF THE NEUROSES. RESISTANCE ANO REPRESSION. 


THEORY 


1916X16/206 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE SEXUAL LIFI* OF HUMAN BEINGS 


THEORY 

• 


1916X16/303 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
UF THE NEUROSES. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LIBIOO ANO THE 
>EXUAL ORGANIZATIONS. 


1916X16/320 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
l*F THE NEUROSIS. SOME THOUGHTS ON DEVELOPMENT ANO 
REGRESSION - AETIOLOGY. 


1916X16/339 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE PATHS TO THE FORMATION OF 
SYMPTOMS. 


THEORY 


1916X16/35 B 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE COMMON NEUROTIC STATE. 


THEORY 


1916X16/37 B 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES DN PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL 
OF THE NEUROSES. ANXIETY. 


THEORY 


1916X16/392 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. THE LIBIOO THEORY ANO NARCISSISM. 


1916X16/412 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL 
OF THE NEUROSES. TRANSFERENCE* 


THEORY 


1916X16/431 


INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL 
OF THE NEUROSES. ANALYTIC THERAPY* 


THEORY 


1916X16/440 


PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGV. A MET APSVC HOLOG ICAL 
SUPPLEMENT TO THE THEORY OF OKEAMS. 




1917014/219 



BEVONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. REVISION OF THE THEORY 
OF INSTINCTS. 1920G18/ 34 

TWO ENCYCLOPEO I A ARTICLES. THE LIBIOO THEORJY. 1923A18/255 

REMARKS ON THE THEORY ANO PRACTICE OF OREAM 

INTERPRETATION. I923C19/1O0 

REMARKS ON THE THEORY ANO PRACTICE OF OREAM 

INTERPRETATION. 1923C19/113 

REMARKS ON THE THEORY ANO PRACTICE OF OREAM 

INTERPRETATION. 1923C19/110 

THE INFANTILE GENITAL ORGANIZATION: AN I NT!IPt»OL AT ION 

INTO THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. 1923E19/UI 

JOSEF POPPER— LYNKEUS ANO THE THEORY OF DREAMS. 1923F 19/261 

AN AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL STUOY. COLL AFOR A TORS. OEFECTORS ANO 

NEW INSTINCT THEORY. 1925020/ 4B 

PREFACE TO HERMANN NUNBERG'S GENERAL THEORY OF THE 

NEUROSES ON A PSYCHOANALYTIC BASIS. 1932021/25B 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS* REVISION 

OF TME THEORY OF OKEAMS. 1933A22/ 7 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MINO ANO ITS 

WORKINGS. THE THEORY OF THE INSTINCTS. 194OA23/140 

SKETCHES FOR THE PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION OF 1893. ON 

THE THEURV CF HYSTERICAL ATTACKS* 194 1A 1/147 

GRAFT 0. ON THE AETIOLOGY ANO THEORY OF THE MAJOR 

NEUROSES. 1950 A 1/106 

LETTER 69. (DOUBTS ABOUT TMEORY OF NEUROSES*). 1950A 1/260 

FIRST PRINCIPAL THEOREM: THE QUANTITATIVE CONCEPTION! 

SECONO PRINCIPAL IHEUREM; TME NEURUNE THEORJYI THE 
CONTACT-BARRIERS* THE BIOLOGICAL STANDPOINT: THE 
PROBLEM OF QUANTITY! PAIN: THE PROBLEM OF QUALITY! 

CONSCIOUSNESS. 1950A 1/295 

THERAPY 

THE FUTURE PROSPECTS OF PSYCHOANALYTIC THERAPY. 1910011/139 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES DN PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. ANALYTIC THERAPY* 1916X16/440 

. 1919A1 7/1 57 



PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGV. TME UNCONSCIOUS. APPENOIX A: 
FREUD AND EWALO HERlNG. APPENOIX B! PSYCHO-PHYSICAL 
PARALLELISM. APPENOIX C: WOROS ANO THINGS. 

JUKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF TME COMIC. COMIC THINGS 
ARE NOT PROPER IN JOKES! RELATION OF HUMOUR TO JOKES. 

THGUGHT 

INTRODUCTION OF THE EGO PRIMARY ANO SECONDARY PROCESS 
IN PSI! COGNITION ANO REPRODUCTIVE THOUGHT: REMEMBERING 
ANO JUOGING: THOUGHT ANO REALITY* 

PATHOLOGICAL OEFENCE THE HYSTERICAL PROTON PStUDOS 
DETERMINANTS OF THE IPROTON PSEUOOS) DISTURBANCE OF 
THOUGHT BV AFFECT. 

THOUGHTS 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ANIMISM. MAGIC ANO THE OMNIPOTENCE OF 
THOUGHTS. ANIMISM. MAGIC. 

TOTEM ANU TABOO. ANIMISIM. MAGIC. OMNIPOTENCE OF 
THOUGHTS. OMNIPOTENCE OF THOUGHTS. TOTEMlSM IS A 
SYSTEM. 

THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR ANU OEATH. THE 
01 SI LLUS IUNMENT OF THE WAR. 

THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR ANO OEATH. CUR ATT ITUOE 
TOWAROS OEATH. APPENOIX! LETTER TO OR. FREOERIK 
VANEEOEN. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THfc NEUROSIS. SOME THOUGHTS ON DEVELOPMENT ANO 
REGRESSION - AETIOLOGY. 

TIME 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. SETTING A TIME 
LIMIT FOR TERMINATION. FACTORS WHICH MAY MAKE ANALYSIS 
INTERMINABLE. 

TIMES 

THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR ANO OEATH. THE 
0ISILLUS10NMENT OF THE WAR. 

THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR ANO OEATH. CUR AT T ITUOE 
TOWAROS OEATH. APPENOIX: LETTER TO DR. FREOERIK 
VANEEOEN. 

TONGUE 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVER YOA Y LIFE. SLIPS OF THE 
TONGUE. 

TONIC 

STUOIES ON HYSTERIA. INT ERA C ER E BRAL TONIC EXCITATIONS - 
AFFECTS. 

TOPOGRAPHICAL 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGV. THE UNCONSCIOUS. VARIOUS 
MEANINGS OF THE UNCONSCIOUS - THE TOPOGRAPHICAL POINT 
OF VIEW. 

TOPOGRAPHY 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGV. THE UNCONSCIOUS. TOPOGRAPHY 
ANO OVNAMICS OF REPRESSION* 

TOTEM 

T.TTEM ANO TABOO. THE HORROR OF INCEST. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE II). 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. 
PARALLEL BETWEEN TABOO ANO OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TREATMENT OF ENEMIES. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOT IONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TABOO UPON RULERS. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 
TABOO UPDN THE UEAO. TABOO ANO CONSCIENCE. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ANIMISM. MAGIC ANO THE OMNIPOTENCE OF 
THOUGHTS. ANIMISM. MAGIC. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ANIMISIM. MAGIC. OMNIPOTENCE OF 
THOUGHTS. OMNIPOTENCE OF THOUGHTS. TOTEMlSM IS A 
SYSTEM. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMlSM IN CHILOHOOO. 
THE NATURE OF TOTEMlSM. 

TABOO AND TOTEM. THE RETURN OF TOTEMlSM IN CHILOREN. 
THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMlSM: TME ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY AND ITS 
RELATION TO TOTEMlSM. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMlSM IN Ch;LOHOOO. 
ANIMAL PHOBIAS. SACRIFICIAL FEASTS. 



S-43 



232 



1B9 IB 14/205 
190 5 C 0/221 

19S0A 1/322 

0 

I950A 1/351 

1912X13/ 75 

*91?Xl 3/ 05 
I915B 14/275 

19 15B 14/209 

1916X16/339 

1937C23/216 

1915014/275 

1915914/2B9 

190 IB 6/ 53 

10950 2/192 

191SE14/172 

1915E 1<»/10O 

1912X13/ 1 

1912X13/ IX 
1912X13/ 18 

1912X13/ 26 

1912X13/ 35 

1912X13/ 41 

1912X13/ 51 

1912X13/ 75 

1912X13/ 05 
1912X13/100 

1912X13/100 



LINES OF AOVANCE IN PSYCHOANALYTIC THERAPY 



1912X13/126 



TOTEM 



CON T I NUA! tO TREATMENT 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEM] SH IN CHtLOHOOO. 
RELATION OF TOTEM MEALS TO FATHER ANO COO. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. RETURN OF TOTEMlSM IN CHILOHOOO. 
OEOIPUS COMPLEX ANO SOCIETY. 

TOTEMlSM 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. ANlMlSlM' MAGIC. OMNIPOTENCE OF 
THOUGHTS* OMNIPOTENCE OF THOUGHTS. TOTEMlSM IS A 
SYSTEM. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMlSM IN CHILOHOOO. 
THE NATURE OF TOTEMlSM. 

TAUOU ANU TOTEM. THE RETURN OF TOTEMlSM IN CHlLOREN. 
THE ORIGIN OF TOTEM I SM J THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY ANO ITS 
RELATIGN TO TOTEMlSM. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF TOTEMlSM IK CHtLOHOOO. 
ANIMAL PHOBIAS. SACR t FICtAL FEASTS. 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. THE RETURN OF I UTEMtSM IN CHtLOHOOO. 
RELATION OF TOTEM MEALS TO FATHER ANO GOO. 



1912X13/140 


A CASE OF SUCCESSFUL TREATMENT BY HYPNOTISM. 


I892B I/II5 




PSYCHtCAL (OM MENTAL) TMEATMENT. 


19058 7/283 


1912X13/155 


OELUSIONS ANO OREAMS IN JENSEN'S GRAOIVA. TREATMENT OF 


I907A 9/ 87 




THF OELUSIONS IN GRAOIVA. POSTSCRIPT TO THE SECONO EO’. 
PREFACE TO WlU-ELM STEKEL *S NERVOUS ANXIETY STA1T5 4*0 




THEIR TREATMENT* 


190BF 9/250 


1912X13/ as 


NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HISTORY: THE BEGINNING OF THE TREATMENT. 




1912X13/100 


tNFANTtLE SEXUALITY. (RAT-MAN). 

NOTES UPON A CASE OF OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. EXTRACTS 
FROM THE CASE HtSTORY, iNUlATtUN INTO THE NATURE OF 


19090t0/t SB 


1912X13/108 


THE TREATMENT. (RAT-MAN). 

TOTEM ANO TABOO. TABOO ANO EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE. THE 


1909010/173 


1912X13/126 


TREATMENT OF ENEMIES. 

PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. ON BEGINNING THE TREATMENT. 
(FURTHER MECOMMENOAT IONS ON THE TECHNIQUE OF 


1912X13/ 35 


1912X13/140 


P SYCHOANALY S I SI • 


'I913C12/121 



TOTEM ANO TABOO. RETURN OF TOTEMlSM IN CHILOHOOO. 

OEOIPUS COMPLEX ANO SOCIETY. 1912X1 3/ IS 5 

TRACES 

LETTER 5 2. (STRATIFICATION OF MEMORY TRACES*) • 1950A 1/23* 

T RAO IT ION 



FAUSSE-MECONNAISSANCE I OE JA-RACONTE ) IN PSYCHOANALYTIC 

TREATMENT. I914AI3/201 

I NTROOUC T ICN TO PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE WAR NEUROSES. 

MEMORANDUM ON THE ELECTRICAL TREATMENT OF WAR 

NEUROTICS. 19SSCI7/211 

TRUTH 



MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 
ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. THE LATENCY PERtOO ANO 
TRAOUtON. 

TRANSCRIPTION 



CONSTRUCTIONS IN ANALYSIS. THE OISTINCT ION BETWEEN 

HISTORICAL ANO MATERIAL TRUTH. 1937023/265 

1939A23/ 66 

HOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. MOSES. HIS PEOPLE 

ANO MONOTHEIST RELIGION. HISTORICAL TRUTH. I939A23/127 



MOSES AND MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. A NOTE ON THE 
TRANSCRIPT ION OF PROPER NAMES. 

TRANSFERcNCE 

FIVE LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. FIFTH LECTURE. 
TRANSFERENCE ANO RESISTANCE. 

PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. THE OYNAMlCS CF TRANSFERENCE. 



TYPICAL 

1939A23/ 3 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAMS. TYPICAL OREAHS: EM8ARASS I NG OREAHS OF bEtNC 
NAKEO. 1900A 4/242 

1910A11/ *9 THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 
OF OREAHS. TYPtCAL OREAMS. OREAHS OF THE OEATH OF 
1912B12/ 97 PERSONS OF WHOM THE OREAMER IS FONO. I 900A 4/248 



PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. OBSERVATtUNS ON TRANSFERENCE LOVE. 

(FURTHER RECOMMENOATI ONS ON 'HE TECHNIQUE OF 

PSYCHOANALYSIS). 1915A12/157 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 

OF THE NEUROSES. TRANSFERENCE. 1916X16/431 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. TRANSFERENCE NEUROSIS IS 
A REPETITION. I920G18/ 18 



THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 

OF OREAMS. TYPtCAL OREAHS. OTHER TYPtCAL OREAMS. I900A 4/271 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE MATERIAL ANO SOURCES 

OF OREAHS. TYPtCAL OREAMS. EXAMINATION OREAMS. 1900A 4/273 

THE I NT EMPR E TAT I ON UF OREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. 

REPRESENTATION BY SYMBOLS IN OREAMS - SOME FURTHER 

TYPICAL OREAMS. 1900A 5/350 



TRANSFORMATIONS 



UCS 



THREE ESSAYS ON .THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFURMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE PRIMACY OF THE GENITAL 
/ONES ANO THE FORE-PLEASURE. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE PROBLEM OF SEXUAL 
EXCITATION. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE LlBtOO THEORY. 



PAPERS UN METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. THE SPECIAL 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SYSTEM UCS. 

19050 7/207 

UNCANNY 

THE UNCANNY. LINGUISTIC APPROACH TG THE UNCANNY. 

19050 7/212 

THE UNCANNY. PHENOMENOLOGY OF UNCANNY AFFECTS. 

19050 7/217 THE UNCANNY. RELATION OF IMAGINATION TO MkALITY. 



1 9t S Et 4/ 18 6 

19I9HI7/2I9 

I9I9HI7/226 

I9I9H17/245 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN 
MEN ANU WOMEN. 



19050 7/219 



THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE FlNOlNG OF AN OBJECT. 



19050 7/222 



ON TRANSFORMATIONS OF IN ST t NCI AS EXEMPLIFIED IN ANAL 
EROTISM. 



191 7C 1 7/125 



THE UNCANNY. APPENOtX: EXTRACT FROM DANIEL SANDER'S 
WUMTERBUCH OEM OEUTSCHEN SPRACHE. 

UNCERTAINTIES 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES UN PSYCHOANALYSIS. OREAMS. 
UNCERTAINTIES ANO CRtUCISMS. 

UNCONSCIOUS 



191 9HI7/253 



1916X15/228 



TRANSIENCE 
ON TRANSIENCE. 



PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENOtX A: 

FRfcUO ANO EWALO HEKlNG. APPENOtX 8: PSYCHO-PHYSICAL 
I 916AI 4/303 PARALLELISM. .\PPENOtX C: WOROS ANO THINGS. 1091B14/2O5 



TRANSLATION 

ON THE GROUNDS FOR OETACHtNG A PARTICULAR SYNOROME FROM 
NEURASTHENIA UNOER THE OESCRtPTtUN ANXIETY NEUROSIS. 

THE TERM ANGST ANO ITS ENGLISH TRANSLATION. 3/116 

PREFACE TO T Ht TRANSLATION OF CHARCOI S LECTURES ON THE 

OISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYStfcM. 18B6F 1/ 19 



SIUOIES ON HYSTERIA. UNCUNSCtOUS tCEAS ANC IDEAS 

INADMISSIBLE TO CONSCIOUSNESS - SPLITTING OF THE M t NO. I89SU 2/222 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY UF THE 

OREAM PROCESSES. THE UNCONSCIOUS ANO CONSCIOUSNESS - 

REALITY. I90GA 5/61.0 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. 1905C B/ 3 



PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF BE'NHEIM'S SUGGESTION. 

PREFACE ANO FOOTNOTES TO THE TRANSLATION OF CHARCOT S 
TUESOAY LECTURES. 

TRAUMAS 



168BX 


1/ 73 


JOKES 

PART. 


ANO 


THE IR 


RELATION 


TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. 


ANALYTtC 


I90SC 


8/ 


9 


1B92A 


t / 1 3 1 


JOKES 


ANO 


THE 1R 


MELATtON 


TO THE UNCONSCtOUS. 


ANALYTtC 












PART. 


THE 


TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. JUKES ARE SIMILAR TO 












DREAMS 


• 










I905C 


6/ 


16 



INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO ThE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 

OF IhE NEUROSES. FtXATtUN TO TRAUMAS - THE UNCONSCIOUS. 1916X16/273 PAMT . THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. CONDENSATIONS ANO 

SUBSTITUTIVE FORMATIONS tN OREAMS. 

TRAUMATIC 



JOKES ANO THEIR MELATtON TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 

BEYONO THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE. REVIEW OF THE PLEASURE PART. ThE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. SUMMARY ANO PUNS. 

PRINCIPLE. TRAUMATIC NEUROSIS AND CHILDREN 6 PLAY ARE 

REPETITIONS. 1920GI8/ 7 JOKES ANO THE I H RELATION TO THE UNCUNSCtOUS. ANALYTtC 

part, the technique of jokes, puns: absurdity as a 

JOKE TECHNIQUE. 



1905C 8/ 29 



I905C 6/ 45 



1905C 8/ 47 



r* 




UNCONSCIOUS 



CON 1 1 NUA TIC UNIVERSAL 



JUKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCUNSC IOUS.. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. RELATION OF JOKES TO THE 



comic: unification as a joke technique. 


190SC 


8/ 60 


JUKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 

part, the technique uf jokes, representation by 
opposite: conceptual jukes. 


1905C 


B/ 70 


JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE CF JOKES. ANALOGY AS A JOKE 
TECHNIQUE. 


1905C 


B/ B 1 


JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 

part, the purposes uf jokes, innocent jokes: SMUT ANO 

THE PURPOSE OF JOKES. 


1905C 


8/ 91 


JUKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. A ANALYTIC 
part, the purpose of jokes. HOSTILE. CYNICAL ANO 
SKEPTICAL JOKES. 


1905C 


8/102 


JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
P' r *. THE MECHANISM OF PLEASURE AND THE PSYCHOGENESIS 

l jkes. 


190SC 


B/117 


JOKES ANU TK'IR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MECHANISM UF PLEASURE ANU THE PSYCHOGENESIS 
OF JOKES. THE PURPOSE ANO FUNCTIONS OF JOKES. 


1905C 


B/12B 


JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. SYNTHETIC 
PART. THE MUTIVES OF JUKES - JOKES AS A SOCIAL 
PROCESS. 


1905C 


B/140 


JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. THE RELATION OF JOKES TO DREAMS ANO TO THE 
UNCON SCIOUS. 


1905C 


159 


JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS* THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. 


1905C 


B/1B1 


JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES AND THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. PSYCHICAL 

location distinguishes jokes from the comic. 


1905C 


8/199 


JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCUNSCIOUS. THEORETIC 
PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. DIFFERENCES 
BETWEEN JOKES ANO COMIC. 


1905C 


B/30B 


JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. THEORETIC 







PART. JOKES ANO THE SPECIES OF THE COMIC. COMIC THINGS 
ARE NOT PROPER IN JOKES: RELATION OF HUMOUR TO JOKES. 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENOIX: 

FRANZ BRENTANO'S RlOOLES. 

OELUS IONS ANO OREAHS IN JEN SEN* S GKADIVA. GRAOlVA ANO 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

A NOTE ON THE UNCONSCIOUS IN PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

PAPERS ON HETAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

PAPERS ON HETAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

JUSTIFICATION FUR THE CONCEPT OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

PAPERS ON HETAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. VARIOUS 
MEANINGS OF THE UNCONSCIOUS - THE TOPOGRAPHICAL POINT 
OF VIEW. 

PAPERS UN HETAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. UNCONSCIOUS 

Emotions. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. TOPOGRAPHY 
ANO OYNAMICS OF REPRESSION. 

PAPERS ON MEIAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. THE SPECIAL 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SYSTEM UCS. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THE TWO SYSTEMS. 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. THE UNCONSCIOUS, assessment 
OF THE UNCONSCIOUS. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. GENERAL THEORY 
OF THE NEUROSES. FIXATION TO TRAUMAS - THE UNCONSCIOUS. 1916X16/273 

THE EGO ANO THE 10 • CONSCIOUSNESS ANO WHAT IS 
UNCONSCIOUS. 

THfc EGO ANO THE 10 • THE OESCRIPTIVE ANO THE OYNAMIC 
UNCONSCIOUS. THE GREAT RESERVOIR OF LIBIOO. 

UNOOING 

INHIBITIONS. SYMPTOMS ANO ANXIETY. UNOOING ANO 
ISOLATION. 

UNHAPPINESS 

CIVILIZATION ANO ITS DISCONTENTS. MAN COPES WITH 
UNHAPPINESS THROUGH OlVERSlON. SUBSTITUTION ANO 
INTOXICATION. 

UNIF ICAT IUN 

JOKES ANO THEIR RELATION TO THE UNCONSCIOUS. ANALYTIC 
PART. THE TECHNIQUE OF JOKES. RELATION OF JOKES TO THE 
COMIC: UNIFICATION AS a JOKE TECHNIQUE. 190 SC a/ 60 



1923B 19/ 12 
1923B1 9/ 60 

1926020/119 
1930A21/ 74 



190SC 8/221 

1905C 8/237 

1907A 9/ 41 
1912G12/255 
1915E14/159 

1915E1 4/ 166 

191SE14/172 
1915E14/177 
191SEI4/1B0 
191 SE 1 4/1 B6 
191SE14/190 
191SE14/196 



ON THE UNIVERSAL TENOENCY TO DEBASEMENT IN THE SPHERE 
OF LCVE. ICONTRIBUT IONS TO THE PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 

UNIVERSALITY 

LETTER 71. (UNIVERSALITY OF OEOIPUS COMPLEX.). 
UNIVERSITIES 

ON THE TEACHING OF PSYCHOANALYSIS IN UNIVERSITIES. 
UNIVERSITY 

ON THE OCCASION OF THE OPENING OF THE HEBREW 
UNIVERSITY. 

VALUE 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. CONSEQUENCES OF INSTINCTUAL 
RENUNCIATION. IN WHAT DOES THE PECULIAR VALVE of 
RELIGIOUS IDEAS LIE. 

VANEEOEN 

THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR ANO DEATH. OUR ATTITUDE 
TOWAROS DEATH. APPENOIX: LETTER TO OR. FREOERlK 
VANEEOEN. 

VARENOONCK'S 

INTRODUCTION TO J. VARENOONCK'S THE PSYCHOLOGY OF 
OAY-OREAMS. 

VARIABLES 

ANALYSIS TERMINABLE ANO INTERMINABLE. CONSTITUTIONAL 
VARIABLES IN EGO* LIBIOO ANO FREE AGGRESSIVENESS. 

VIC I S SI TUOES 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHOLOGY. INSTINCTS ANO THEIR 
VICISSITUDES. 

PAPERS on METAPSYCHULOGY. INSTINCTS ANO THEIR 
VICISSITUDES. 

VIENNA 

MOSES ANO MONOTHEISM: THREE ESSAYS. HOSESi HIS PEOPLE 
AND MONOTHEIST RELIGION: PREFATORY NOTES I (VIENNA) t 
II (LONDON). 

VIRGINITY 

THE TABOO OF VIRGINITY. I CQNTRI BUT IONS TO THE 
PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE). 

Vi SION 

THE PSYCHOANALYTIC VIEW OF PSYCHOGENIC DISTURBANCE OF 
VISION. 

VI SUAL 

A mythological parallel to a visual obsession. 

VON-FREUNU 

OR. ANTON VCN-FREUNO. 

VON-HUG-HELLMUIH 

LETTER TO OR. H ERMINE V ON-HUG-HELL MU TH. 

VOWELS 

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SEQUENCES OF VOWELS. 

WAHRHEIT 

A CHILOHODU RECOLLECTION FROM OICHTUNG UNO WAHRHEIT. 
WAKING 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAHS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
OEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. THE RELATION OF 
OREAHS TO WAKING LIFE. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
DEALING WITH THE PROBLEMS OF OREAMS. WHY OREAMS ARE * 
FORGOTTEN AFTER WAKING. 

WAR 

THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES CiN WAR ANO OEATH. THE 
DISILLUSIONMENT OF THE WAR. 

THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR ANO OEATH. GUR ATTITUDE 
TOWAROS OEATH. APPENOIX: LETTER TD OR. FREOERlK 
VANEEOEN. 

INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE WAR NEUROSES. 
WHY WAR? 

WHY WAR?: LETTER FROM EINSTEIN. 

INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHOANALYSIS ANO THE WAR NEUROSES. 
MEMORANDUM ON THE ELEC7RI CAL TREATMENT OF WAR * 
NEUROTICS. 



$-46 



234 



1912011/177 
1950A 1/263 
1919J1 7/ 169 

1925C 19/ 29 2 

1927C2 1 / 10 

191SB14/2B9 

192 IB 1 8/271 

1937C23/240 

191 SC 14/ 11 1 
191SC14/U7 

1939A23/ 54 

191BA1 1/191 

19101 11/209 
1916B14/337 
1920C1B/267 
19191 14/341 
1911012/341 
1917B 17/145 

19Q0A 4/ 1 

1900 A 4/ 43 

191SB14/27S 

191SBI4/2B9 
1919017/205 
1933B 2 2/19 7 
I933B22/199 

195 SC 17/21 1 



«, 



WAYWARO 

PREFACE 10 A ICHHORN' S HAYWARD YOUTH. 

WEISS'S 

INTRODUCTION TO EDOAROO W El SS 'S ELEMENTS OF 
PSYCHOANALYSIS. 

WELTANSCHAUUNG 

NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE 
OUEST ION OF A WELTANSCHAUUNG. 

WILL 

the resistances to psychoanalysis, appenoix: extract 

FROM SCHOPENHAUER'S THE WORLD AS WILL ANO IOEA. 

WISH 

THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. A DREAM IS THE 
FULFILLMENT OF A WISH. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF OREAMS. THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE 
DREAM PROCESSES. WISH FULFILLMENT. 

INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHOANALYSIS. DREAMS. WISH 
FULFILLMENT. 

LETTER 105. I IMPORTANCE OF WISH FULFILLMENT.). 

WISHES 

THE FUTURE OF AN ILLUSION. CIVILIZATION RESJS UPON 
RENUNCIATION OF INSTINCTUAL WISHES. 

WISHFUL 

THE FUNCTIONING OF THE APPARATUS! THE PATHS OF 

conduction; the experience of satisfaction; the 

EXPERIENCE OF PAIN! AFFECTS AND WISHFUL STATES. 

HITCHES 

LETTER 56. (HYSTERIA AND WITCHES. I. 

LETTER 57. ( Wl TCHE S AND SYHBOLI SM. ) . 

WITTELS 

LETTER TO FRITZ WlHELS. 

WOLFMAN 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. INTRODUCTORY 
REMARKS ABOUT THE WOLFMAN. 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. GENERAL 
SURVEY OF THE PATIENT'S ENVIRONMENT ANO OF THE HISTORY 
OF THE CASE. (WOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE 
SEDUCTION ANO ITS IMMEDIATE CONSEQUENCES • (WOLFMAN). 

FRUM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE OREAM 
ANO THE PRIMAL SCENE. (WOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. A FEW 
OISCUSSIONS. (WOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. THE 
OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS. (WOLFMAN). 

FRDM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. ANAL EROTISM 
AND THE CASTRATION COMPLEX. (WOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. FRESH 
MATERIAL FROM THE PRIMAL PEKIOO - SOLUTION. (WOLFMAN). 

FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS. 
RECAPITULATIONS AND PROBLEMS. (WOLFMAN). 

WOMAN 

THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
WOMAN. 

THE PSYCHOGENESI S OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
WUHAN . 

THE PSYCHOGENESIS OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
WUHAN. 

THE PSYCHO GENES I S OF A CASE OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN A 
WOMAN. 

WOMEN 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 
TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE DIFFERENTIATION BETWEEN 
MEN ANO WOMEN. 

REVIEW OF WILHELM NEUTRA'S LETTERS TU NEUROTIC WOMEN. 
WORDS 

PAPERS ON METAPSYCHULOGV. THE UNCONSCIOUS. APPENOIX A: 
FREUD ANO EWALO HERING. APPENDIX Bi PSYCHO-PHYSICAL 
PARALLELISM. APPENDIX C: WDRDS AND THINGS. 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYOAV LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
FOREIGN WOROS. 



1925F 19/27 3 

1931C21/256 

1933A22/158 

19/223 

1900A 4/122 

1900A 5/550 

1916X15/213 
19S0A 1/278 



WDRDS 

THE PSYCHOPATHOLOGY OF EVERYDAY LIFE. THE FORGETTING OF 
NAMES AND SETS OF WORDS. 

THE ANTITHETICAL MEANING OF PRIMAL WOROS. 

WORK 

THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE DRfcAM-WORK: THE WORK 
OF CONDENSATION. 

THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS. THE OREAM-WORK. THE WORK 
OF DISPLACEMENT. 

SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK* 
THE EXCEPTIONS. 

SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK* 
THOSE WRECKEO BY SUCCESS. 

SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 
CRIMINALS FROM A SENSE DF GUILT. 

GROUP PSYCHOLOGY AND THE ANALYSIS OF THE EGO. FURTHER 
PROBLEMS ANO LINES OF WORK. 

AN OUTLINE UF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE PRACTICAL TASK. AN 
EXAMPLE OF PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 

WORKING 

ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHOANALYTIC MOVEMENT. EARLY 
HISTORY. FREUD WORKING ALONE. 



1927C21/ 3 WORKING-THROUGH 



PAPERS ON TECHNIQUE. REMEMBERING, REPEATING AND 
WORKING-THROUGH. (FURTHER R ECOMHENOA T I ONS ON THE 
TECHNIQUE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS). 



1950A 1/312 WORKINGS 



195 OA 1/24 2 
1950A 1/243 

1924G1 9/286 

191801 7/ 7 

1918B1 7/ 13 
1918B17/ 19 
191BB17/ 29 
1918B1 7/ 48 
1918B1 7/ 61 
191BB17/ 72 
1916B1 7/ 89 
1918B1 7/104 

1920A 18/ 146 
1920A1 8/155 
192 OA 1 8/1 60 
1920A1B/167 



1905D 7/219 
1910H 1 1/238 



AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNU ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MIND ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. THE THEDRY GF THE INSTINCTS. 

AN UUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO JTS 
WORKINGS. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SEXUAL FUNCTION. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. PSYCHICAL QUALITIES. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE MlNO ANO ITS 
WORKINGS. OREAM INTERPRETATION AS AN ILLUSTRATION. 

WORLO 

THE RESISTANCES TO PSYCHOANALYSIS. APPENOIX: EXTRACT 
FROM SCHOPENHAUER'S THE WORLO AS WILL ANO IOEA. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YIELO. 
THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS AND THE EXTERNAL WORLO. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YIELO. 
THE INTERNAL WORLO. 

WORTERBUCH 

THE UNCANNY. APPENDIX! EXTRACT FROM OANlEL SANDER'S 
WORTERBUCH OER DEUTSCHEN SPRACHE. 

WRECKEO 

SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHOANALYTIC WORK. 
THOSE WRECKEO BY SUCCESS. 

WRI TERS 

CREATIVE WRITERS AND GAY- OR EAM ING • 

WRITING-PAO 

A NOTE UPON THE MYSTIC WRITING-PAO, 

WRIT INGS 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. APPENDIX: LIST 
OF WRITINGS BY FREUD DEALING PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY 
WITH SEXUALITY. 

STUDIES ON HYSTERIA. APPENOIX A: THE CHRCNOLCGY OF THE 
CASE OF FRAU EMMY-VUN-N. AhPtNOIX B! LIST OF hRITINGS 
BY FREUO OEALING PRINCIPALLY WITH CONVERSION HYSTERIA. 



ABSTRACTS OF THE SCIENTIFIC WRITINGS OF OR, 
1877-1897. 



SIGM. FREUD 



1891614/205 
1901 B 6/ 8 



PREFACE TO FREUD S SHORTER WRITINGS 1693-1906. 

THE INTERPRETATION DF DREAMS. APPENOIX A! A PREMONITORY 
OREAM FULFILLED. APPENDIX B: LIST OF WRITINGS BY FRtUD 
DEALING PREDOMINANTLY OR LARGELY WITH OREAMS. 

YIELO 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YIELD. 

THE PSYCHICAL APPARATUS ANO THE EXTERNAL WORlO. 

AN OUTLINE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS. THE THEORETICAL YIELD. 

THE INTERNAL WORLO. 



CONTINUATIC 

190 IB 6/ 15 
1910EU/153 

1900A 4/279 
1900A 4/305 
1916D14/311 
1916D 14/316 
1916D 14/332 
192 1C1B/I00 
1940A23/1B3 

1914D14/ 7 

1914G12/14S 

1940A23/144 
1940A23/148 
1940A 23/152 
1940A23/157 
1940A23/16S 

19/223 

1940A23/195 

1940A23/205 

19 19H17/253 

19 16D 14/316 
1908E 9/141 
1925A19/227 

7/244 

18950 2/307 

18976 3/225 
1906 B 3/ 3 

194 1C 5/623 

1940A23/195 

1940A23/205 



S-40 




235 



YOUTH 



PREFACE TO AtCHHORN'S WAYWARO YOUTH. 1925F 19/273 

ZE t TSCHRI FT 

EOITORIAL CHANCES IN THE ZEITSCHRlFT. 1926H19/293 

ZONES 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE SEXUAL 

ABERRATIONS. COMPONENT iNSTtNCTS AND EROTOGENIC ZONES. 19050 7/167 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE THEORY OF SEXUALITY. THE 

TRANSFORMATIONS OF PUBERTY. THE PRIMACY OF- THE GENITAL 

ZONES ANO THE FORE-PLEASURE. 19050 7/207 

LETTER 75. (EROTOGENIC ZONES. )• 1950A 1/26B 

ZURICH 

LETTER TO THE EOITOR OF THE JEW ISH-PRESS-CENTRE IN 

ZURICH. 1 925 B19/29 1 



S-47 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1972 0-455-582 




236 



i 



DEPARTMENT OF 

HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE 



HEALTH SERVICES AND MENTAL HEALTH ADMINISTRATION 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH 
5600 FISHERS LANE 
ROCKVILLE, MARYLAND 20852 



POSTAGE AND FEES PAID 
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF H.E.W. 




OFFICIAL BUSINESS 
Penalty for private use, $300 



DHEW Publication No. (HSM) 72-9001 
Printed 1971 Reprinted 1972 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE 



Health Services and Mental 



Health Administration 




National Institute of Mental Health 



Z37 



